January in Live Jazz: 5 Standout Shows
Welcome to “The Month in Live Jazz,” a column highlighting five outstanding performances from the past month on stages across New York City.
‘TRIBUTE TO GERI ALLEN’ Tishman Auditorium at the New School, Jan. 15
Geri Allen, who died last year, was one of jazz’s great sense-makers of the past 35 years — a splintered and confusing time in the music, by any account. But she will be remembered mostly for her luminescent attack as a pianist, her way of guiding a band, and pushing it toward a breakthrough.
To open this tribute concert, a video of Allen performing played on a screen high above the stage, and slowly, the pianist Craig Taborn joined in, offering scattered, bright-hued flights in duet with the recording. He is one of the major inheritors of Allen’s influence, a player who can be abstract and rhythmic and crisp all at once. His playing implied what the rest of the evening guaranteed: that Allen’s impact will continue to ripple throughout almost every pocket of the jazz world.
Organized by the drummer Terri Lyne Carrington and presented as part of Winter Jazzfest, this concert was not a simple rehashing of Allen’s repertoire. A quartet featuring Ms. Carrington, the alto saxophonist Tia Fuller, the pianist Kris Davis and the bassist Linda May Han Oh played a sharp but untethered rendition of “Miss Ann,” by Eric Dolphy, who was the subject of Allen’s master’s thesis. Later, the TEN Trio — Ms. Carrington, the bassist Esperanza Spalding and the trumpeter and pianist Nicholas Payton — played two tunes with a tightly wound urgency, the driving “RTG” and the spacious “Unconditional Love.” Ms. Carrington and Ms. Spalding used to play with Allen; after her death, they joined with Mr. Payton. The new trio has quickly developed a rapport, and its performance was a highlight.
Toward the end of the evening, Allen’s son, Wallace Roney Jr., 21, took the stage with his trumpet. With a quartet, he played “Your Pure Self (Mother to Son),” a piece Allen wrote for him, dashing off spry lines with a piquant grace. It was easy to hear some redolence of Ambrose Akinmusire, one of today’s most influential young trumpeters. Mr. Roney was honoring his mother by looking at his own surroundings, and then pushing ahead.
Geri Allen’s final album as a leader was “Grand River Crossings,” a solo piano recording from 2013 released on Motéma Records.
‘JAZZ-AGEDDON:’ RAY ANGRY, WARREN WOLF AND FRIENDS The Blue Note, Jan. 22
Years ago, if you put a few musicians from one of jazz’s major creative streams into a room, you could more or less predict the registers they would hit and the roles each instrument would play. Not today. For three nights in January, the pianist Ray Angry and the vibraphonist Warren Wolf took over the Blue Note, inviting a sundry crew of collaborators to participate in what they called the “Jazz-ageddon” series, and the result was a multihued patchwork.
Mr. Angry and Mr. Wolf come from opposite ends of the same general spectrum. Mr. Angry has been a first-call pianist for pop acts like John Legend and Joss Stone, but his big influences are jazz and gospel. Mr. Wolf is a vibraphonist who’s most often heard in acoustic combos, playing straight-ahead jazz and its offshoots. On Jan. 22, they were joined by seven other musicians, including the saxophonists Tia Fuller and James Carter, the bassist Ben Williams and the drummer Marcus Gilmore.
The music included “The Community Theme Song,” a samba-inflected tune by the trombonist Wycliffe Gordon with a gently lingering melody; David Bowie’s “Space Oddity”; and a surprise cameo from Black Thought of the Roots, who rapped a casually prodigious freestyle over the beat from Nas’s “One Love,” played by Mr. Wolf, Mr. Williams and Mr. Gilmore.
There was just one moment when the musicians fell into a crisp, midtempo swing feel, and it was on a song you wouldn’t expect: “My First Mine,” an early-90s garage-rock scorcher from the indie-rock band Pavement.
Warren Wolf returns to New York March 6-10, playing a run at Birdland with the Cyrus Chestnut Quartet.
JEN SHYU The Jazz Gallery, Jan. 24
Jen Shyu’s latest song cycle, “Nine Doors,” grew out of loss. After her friend, the Indonesian shadow puppeteer Sri Joko Raharjo, died in a car accident with his wife and infant child, only his 4-year-old daughter survived. With her in mind, Ms. Shyu set about culling folkloric tales from traditions across East and Southeast Asia, and created her own syncretic saga for the present day.
The work is more than conceptual inquiry or personal discovery. At the Jazz Gallery, Ms. Shyu turned the stage into a space of imaginative ritual; she framed storytelling and mythmaking as contemporary phenomena — even necessities. She opened the performance by leading the room in a stretching exercise, then explained the story of the crash in a somber but welcoming tone. Standing by the piano, she explained how the collision had occurred, almost acting as if the instrument were the vehicle.
Many minutes later, after a song of cold, raging grief — Ms. Shyu singing in a blustery howl, clawing at the strings of the Japanese biwa — she wandered back toward the piano. Eventually it became clear that she was simply retrieving an instrument perched along the wall, but for a moment my breath stopped. The piano still seemed to represent the scene of the crash, and it felt as if she were re-entering a space of peril. That magic remained throughout the set: A simple jazz club stage became a territory of belief, narrative and wonder.
Jen Shyu’s “Song of Silver Geese” was released in November on Pi Recordings. It was on our list of the year’s best albums.
LOGAN RICHARDSON QUARTET Smalls, Jan. 29
By certain appearances, the alto saxophonist Logan Richardson’s performance at Smalls should have made a listener feel impatient or unfocused. Leading a standard sax-piano-bass-drums quartet, Mr. Richardson played eight original tunes, each one tumbling out with a sense of bold disassembly. Their sections were hard to define; the band swelled and crested without settling into closely knit patterns. Often, polyrhythms were implied, and then the band quickly started to play outside and around them. The group sometimes shambled into a free-flowing rubato right in the middle of a fast tune, but it maintained conviction, and avoided melodrama.
But there was a kind of rich cohesion here, even though you only really felt it in retrospect. Partly that’s because of the confidence and strength brought by Mr. Richardson’s band mates: John Escreet on piano, Harish Raghavan on bass and Kenny Grohowski on drums. They rendered each individual note with stark, upstanding force, holding firm amid the swarm.
And as a saxophone soloist, Mr. Richardson went in every direction but the one you expected; he played arcing, bluesy, honeydew phrases without submitting to cliché. He’s fond of soul-inflected grace notes, but he always articulates them thickly and cleanly, rolling into and out of them. In his hands, every warm gesture is a forceful statement.
Logan Richardson’s “Shift” was released in 2016 on Blue Note Records.
JOHN HOLLENBECK’S LARGE ENSEMBLE Le Poisson Rouge, Jan. 30
We’re about 70 years into the eerie afterlife of the jazz big band. What started out as an engine for popular American dance music hasn’t had much to do with dance floors — or pop culture — since the end of the 1940s. Since then, the big band has been a medium for expansively minded composers, who aren’t aiming for dancers but have a lot to say about physical movement as it occurs on the bandstand, within the music.
John Hollenbeck, a drummer and composer, is one of today’s most dynamic orchestral jazz bandleaders, a fact that’s reinforced by the release of “All Can Work,” the arresting new album from his Large Ensemble. With this 19-piece group (20 including its conductor, J.C. Sanford), he pulls from the annals of that big-band afterlife: Gil Evans’s work with Miles Davis in the 1950s; Bob Brookmeyer’s slyly locomotive arrangements of the 1970s and ’80s; the lush, tangled vibrancy of Guillermo Klein’s music from the 1990s and early 2000s.
The John Hollenbeck Large Ensemble’s CD release performance began with “Elf” — an extended composition based around “Isfahan,” the deliquescent Billy Strayhorn ballad — and ended on a bridling, crosshatched rendition of Kraftwerk’s “The Model.” In between were four Hollenbeck originals, all from the new album, each one doused in citrusy, corrugated harmonies, with currents that built big circles around crescent-shaped melodies. The record’s title track was a highlight, with the vocalist Theo Bleckmann singing lyrics drawn from messages that the trumpeter Laurie Frink had written to Mr. Hollenbeck soon before her death in 2013. The trumpet section played a bobbing, elliptical pattern based upon Ms. Frink’s instructional exercises, and Mr. Bleckmann sang in a gentle, matter-of-fact tone: “I will miss you all, and especially the music.”
John Hollenbeck’s Large Ensemble just released “All Can Work” on New Amsterdam Records.
A version of this article appears in print on February 1, 2018, on Page C5 of the New York edition with the headline: Powerful Nights on the Stage in New York.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe


