Review: Cool and Subdued, a Pianist Saves Debussy From Cliché
What was the pianist Stephen Hough doing opening his Carnegie Hall recital on Tuesday, honoring the 100th anniversary of Debussy’s death, with “Clair de lune”? The piece has been so overplayed that’s it’s almost past cliché.
Why not do the full work from which it’s drawn, Debussy’s early “Suite Bergamasque,” which you don’t often hear? And what were Schumann’s formidable Fantasy in C and Beethoven’s stormy “Appassionata” Sonata doing on a recital dedicated to Debussy, who didn’t have much interest in either composer?
Well, the adventurous Mr. Hough, who is also a composer, knew just what he was up to. His subdued account of “Clair de lune” set a contemplative mood in the hall. I think Mr. Hough was also sending another message: Don’t assume anything about Debussy; even this popular early piece reveals a radical in the making. Mr. Hough conveyed the exploratory elements of “Clair de lune” by playing it with rhythmic integrity and not a trace of expressive milking. He emphasized the halting flow of the ethereal melody, which unfolds in abrupt phrases that keep stopping momentarily to let a plush harmony linger.
It led beautifully into the second book of “Images” (1907). (Mr. Hough includes both books of “Images” on his new Debussy recording for Hyperion, which is also available for download.) The first piece, “Bells Through the Leaves,” displays Debussy the pathbreaker. A simple falling and rising figure, based on a whole-tone scale, is soon enshrouded with fluid arabesques and radiant sonorities. Mr. Hough brought impish charm to the gurgling figurations and splashy outbursts that suggest “Goldfish,” the title of the third piece. Yet he maintained a coolness that never let the music seem a mere exercise in Impressionism, a term Debussy strongly disavowed.
Despite his love-hate attitude toward Wagner, Debussy essentially rejected the Germanic Romantic heritage. Still, the way Mr. Hough played the opening of Schumann’s Fantasy brought out an almost impressionistic quality in it. The right-hand theme had nobility and grandeur, but the left hand was a whirling wash of surging harmonies. Mr. Hough dispatched the daunting middle movement, a stirring march, with rhythmic bite and crispness, while bringing out the music’s jagged edges and trips into the fantastical.
In the first book of “Images,” Mr. Hough again balanced atmospheric colorings with pinpoint highlighting of Debussy’s daring harmonic language. He ended with a dark, taut account of Beethoven’s “Appassionata.” The feverish performance of the perpetual-motion finale was all the more terrifying for the reined-in tempo Mr. Hough took — until the coda, played with hellbent fury. And, to my surprise, the murky sounds Mr. Hough summoned during stretches of dizzying passagework seemed to anticipate Debussy.
