50 Years On, This Film Still Brings Clarity to Bach’s Glorious Compositions
“Chronicle of Anna Magdalena Bach,” by Jean-Marie Straub and Danièle Huillet, is a recording of magnificent music and a film of equally impressive contradictions. An impossible documentary, at once austere and rhapsodic, it evokes the 18th century while feeling as present as a live concert.
The movie is being released here on Friday in an excellent new 4K digital restoration on the occasion of its 50th anniversary.
Most simply described, “Chronicle” is a feature-length series of recitals, nearly always filmed from a fixed camera in a single, uninterrupted take. The music was recorded from a microphone placed by the camera and the musicians, who play authentic 18th-century instruments and are dressed in clothing from that period. Impressively bewigged, Gustav Leonhardt, the Dutch harpsichordist and conductor, stands in for Bach.
Straub-Huillet, as the couple preferred to be called, are considered among the most rigorous of filmmakers. Their clarity is bracing. Hardly a conventional biopic, “Chronicle” was made in the spirit of Robert Bresson’s 1950s adaptation of the Georges Bernanos novel “The Diary of a Country Priest.” In writing about that film, the critic André Bazin said, “the cast is not being asked to act out a text, or even to live it out, just to speak it.” In “Chronicle,” the major text is Bach’s music.
A variety of compositions are performed in what appear to be the same churches and castles where they were originally composed and played during Bach’s time, and staged from angles that encourage awareness of how the music is being produced. The first selection, one of the Brandenburg Concertos, shows Bach at the harpsichord, the camera positioned to look over his shoulder at the score from which he reads; at a climactic moment, the camera is then dollied back to reveal the entire ensemble. (In a 1995 interview, Ms. Huillet remarked that “Chronicle” reflected a “hatred of the way in which music was then filmed.” She made an enigmatic exception for “the films of the Marx Brothers” and the Hollywood musical “Gentlemen Prefer Blondes.”)
Although, as the filmmakers have said, “Chronicle” essentially documents “the process of performing,” the movie also addresses the conditions of Bach’s life as an artist. Performances are annotated by images of actual letters, maps and scores. There is also a script, written by Mr. Straub and Ms. Huillet, that, drawing largely from Bach’s correspondence, is attributed to his second wife, Anna Magdalena. This text, heard in lightly accented English, is read rapidly and without inflection — giving an account of children born (and those who died), illnesses suffered, appeals made to various patrons, career frustrations and eventual successes.
Composing was the least of Bach’s struggles. Indeed, impervious to the recitation of personal tragedies and professional difficulties, enduring for hundreds of years after it was composed, his music seems all the more exalted. Juxtaposing these glorious sounds with the hardships that accompanied their production, “Chronicle” offers evidence of transcendence. The movie might have been made, as the 20th-century patron Princesse de Polignac (Winnaretta Singer, heir to the sewing-machine fortune) said of a Bach chorale, to prove that “we had a reason for living on this rock.”
A version of this article appears in print on March 2, 2018, on Page C3 of the New York edition with the headline: At 50, a Musical Biopic Remains Unlike Any Other.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe


