The Philadelphia Orchestra Looks West for Its New Leader
The Philadelphia Orchestra, which has been trying to ride a wave of recent musical success after facing the rough seas of bankruptcy earlier this decade, announced Monday evening that it had chosen a new leader: Matías Tarnopolsky, the executive and artistic director of Cal Performances, the performing arts organization at the University of California, Berkeley.
He will succeed Allison Vulgamore, who stepped down as the orchestra’s president and chief executive officer at the end of December after eight momentous years that saw the orchestra tap Yannick Nézet-Séguin as its music director, go in and out of bankruptcy protection and endure a brief strike that canceled its opening night concert in 2016.
Mr. Tarnopolsky, 48, rethought the mission of Cal Performances, working to strengthen its ties with both the campus and the Bay Area community. He has deep experience molding the artistic profiles of orchestras, having previously served as the vice president of artistic planning for the New York Philharmonic and the senior director of artistic planning for the Chicago Symphony Orchestra. But in Philadelphia he will also be responsible for the orchestra’s financial fortunes, after a tumultuous decade that saw the storied ensemble become the most prominent American orchestra to seek bankruptcy protection.
“It’s an organization of great resilience, and I think it’s got a foundation for an even more remarkable future,” Mr. Tarnopolsky said in a telephone interview, explaining that he hoped to build on the strong relationship that Mr. Nézet-Séguin had formed with the musicians and audiences.
The orchestra has enjoyed great musical success under Mr. Nézet-Séguin: David Allen wrote in The New York Times in 2015 that “it might be that no American orchestra sounds more alive.” Mr. Nézet-Séguin, who will become music director of the Metropolitan Opera next season, has extended his contract in Philadelphia through the 2025-26 season, ensuring musical continuity.
But the orchestra continues to face fiscal challenges, as the brief 2016 strike showed: musicians, whose pay was cut by 14 percent in 2011, held out for raises that management said it could ill afford. (They settled on a three-year deal with modest raises.)
Mr. Tarnopolsky, who was born in Argentina and raised in London, will begin as president and chief executive officer of the orchestra in August, and his initial contract is for a five-year term. His selection was first reported Monday morning by the website Slipped Disc. The orchestra’s chairman, Richard B. Worley, praised his “track record of cultivating artistic relationships, new audiences, and communities” in a statement.
