This Week: Condola Rashad as ‘Saint Joan’; Planet Earth Is ‘One Strange Rock’
New TV shows, museum openings, film releases and concerts — it’s a lot to keep track of. Let us help you. For the week of April 1, seven events in New York and elsewhere not to be missed:
Previews start April 3; manhattantheatreclub.com.
For a teenager fresh off her father’s farm in the 15th century, Joan of Arc is a swaggering charmer — the kind of charismatic stranger who can talk her way into the centers of power and get the men there to do what she wants. “I shall put courage into thee,” she promises the timorous French dauphin in George Bernard Shaw’s “Saint Joan.” Such emboldening is pretty much her specialty. Her own confidence comes from the heavenly voices she hears, exhorting her to drive the invading English out of France. Partisans on both sides look at her success and see sorcery.
Condola Rashad, a Tony Award nominee most recently for last season’s “A Doll’s House, Part 2,” will play the title role in Manhattan Theater Club’s Broadway revival of “Saint Joan.” Directed by Daniel Sullivan, it starts previews on Tuesday, April 3, and opens on Wednesday, April 25, at the Samuel J. Friedman Theater. With a cast including John Glover, Daniel Sunjata, Walter Bobbie and Adam Chanler-Berat, it’s a play about nationalism, religious zealotry and what happens to women who stray from their place. “Pride will have a fall, Joan,” the archbishop warns. Yet the stubborn creature won’t give up. LAURA COLLINS-HUGHES
April 2; channel.nationalgeographic.com.
Sure, the allure of the cosmos, in its infinite mystery, is undeniable. But “the strangest place in the whole universe might just be right here,” Will Smith says as the host of “One Strange Rock.” This kaleidoscopic National Geographic series merges heavenly photography from the International Space Station with reminiscences from eight astronauts — among them Mae Jemison, the first African-American woman in space, and Chris Hadfield, who memorably performed David Bowie’s “Space Oddity” while in orbit — to ponder the miracle of life on Earth.
The premiere toed the delicate blue line that is our planet’s atmosphere, explaining how a pummeling dust storm in Africa can affect the river of cloud flowing through the Amazonian sky. The second episode, airing Monday, April 2, examines the dynamic storm — call it destructive good fortune — that wiped out the dinosaurs 66 million years ago, and is still roiling around space today. The filmmaker Darren Aronofsky, who most recently imagined Earth’s genesis in his psychological thriller “Mother!,” is an executive producer. KATHRYN SHATTUCK
April 6-Aug. 12; drawingcenter.org.
Terry Winters’s deceptively ambitious graphite and watercolor drawing “Schema (57),” 1985-86, sets easily-read Platonic geometry against fuzzy edges and semantic ambiguity to create a kind of neurological illusion.
Five clear, brightly colored dots tilting over a shadowy planet speckled with craters immediately light up the language centers of your brain: They look too clear and simple not to mean something equally clear and simple. But in fact they don’t mean anything specific at all, so you are left with no object for your understanding except the process of understanding itself.
To put it another way, the drawing can make you hear yourself think — as can most of the 80 or so drawings and works on paper, from the 1980s to present, that comprise this thematically-organized retrospective. WILL HEINRICH
April 5-8, lamama.org.
Over the past four decades, the choreographer Jane Comfort has developed a frank, whimsical style of dance-theater, pointedly addressing social and political issues through pairings of movement and text. Her 1995 “S/He” played with reversals of gender and race to shed light on the Clarence Thomas and Anita Hill hearings of the early ’90s. In “Deportment” (1991), she staged a satirical etiquette lesson to comment on learned behaviors of racism, sexism and homophobia in America. More recently, with “Altiplano” (2015), she has explored dancing on its own, untethered from words.
Excerpts from these and other works, live and on video, will be part of Ms. Comfort’s 40th anniversary retrospective at La MaMa, a celebration featuring over 20 current and former members of her company. Also on the program will be “Four Screaming Women” (1982), “Street Talk” (1984) and “Amazing Grace” (2018), a reflection on our current political moment. Even the older works, though, may not seem so out of date. SIOBHAN BURKE
April 3-7; carolinerosemusic.com.
“Floating around in a vacuum of space/Everything here, it all looks the same,” Caroline Rose sings on “More of the Same.” By the time she hits the chorus a few lines later, it’s clear that this uncommonly catchy sketch of ennui is the kind of song you want to hear again as soon as it’s finished.
There’s more where that comes from on “Loner,” the New York songwriter’s second album, released recently to strong reviews. “Cry!,” an anxious inner monologue set to buoyant electro-pop, and the bitingly sarcastic “Soul No. 5” are among the other immediate standouts.
Ms. Rose’s live appearances at the South by Southwest Music Festival in March were well-received. Hear “More of the Same” and more when her tour swings back to the East Coast this week, with shows in Brooklyn (April 3, Rough Trade NYC), Boston (April 4), Philadelphia (April 5), New Haven (April 6) and Burlington, Vermont (April 7). SIMON VOZICK-LEVINSON
April 6. 
It’s a coldblooded human who doesn’t love a warmhearted horse story. And “Lean on Pete,” opening Friday, April 6, in New York and Los Angeles, starts out as just that: the tale of two misfits. Pete is a 5-year-old quarter horse at the end of his usefulness, and Charley (Charlie Plummer) is a gently scrappy 15-year-old trying to make something of his life by helping Pete’s grizzled owner (Steve Buscemi) at a racetrack in Portland, Ore.
Tending to Pete and hanging with his jockey (Chloë Sevigny) gives Charley a sense of purpose and connection sorely lacking in his itinerant existence with his carousing single father (Travis Fimmel). But when Charley learns that Pete is headed for slaughter, he and his newfound companion make a run for it through the American frontier on a quest for a place to call home. Andrew Haigh (“Weekend,” “45 Years”) directed this violence-tinged, startlingly bleak coming-of-age story, adapted from Willy Vlautin’s novel, which earned Mr. Plummer the Marcello Mastroianni Award for best young actor at the Venice Film Festival last year. KATHRYN SHATTUCK
April 4, 5 and 6; nyphil.org.
A highlight of last season’s New York Philharmonic programming was the local premiere of Anna Thorvaldsdottir’s uncannily tactile “Aeriality,” part of the composer’s appointment as the orchestra’s Kravis Emerging Composer. Observers tend to link Ms. Thorvaldsdottir’s willfully craggy music to the surreal tectonics of her native Iceland. But her expansive works defy such national clichés, and instead frequently channel abstract metaphysical concepts into acutely mysterious forms.
This week, the orchestra will give the world premiere of her “Metacosmos,” a Philharmonic commission that, as Ms. Thorvaldsdottir writes, is “constructed around the natural balance between beauty and chaos” and inspired by “the speculative metaphor of falling into a black hole.” It opens a program conducted by Esa-Pekka Salonen that includes Beethoven’s “Eroica” Symphony as well as the composer’s Piano Concerto No. 3, featuring the distinguished young pianist Benjamin Grosvenor. WILLIAM ROBIN
