What’s on TV Monday: ‘The Late Late Show’ Special and ‘Pass Over’
James Corden looks back at his favorite moments from “The Late Late Show.” And “Pass Over” reimagines “Waiting for Godot” in present-day Chicago. 
THE LATE LATE SHOW CARPOOL KARAOKE PRIMETIME SPECIAL 10 p.m. on CBS. The host James Corden rounds up another set of stars for his third prime-time special. He performs a musical number inspired by Bruno Mars with the musician and comedian Reggie Watts, while the actors Anna Faris, Allison Janney, Kunal Nayyar and Iain Armitage play along during a bizarre iteration of “The Sound of Music.” Christina Aguilera gets in the passenger seat for some “Carpool Karaoke.”
NEW ORLEANS: CITY OF STORIES 6 p.m. on National Geographic. New Orleans has a lot more to offer than mouthwatering Po’ Boys and the tourist favorite Bourbon Street. This new travel series highlights the city’s hidden gems as it celebrates its 300th anniversary. Artists, bartenders and historians share the movements and customs that give the Big Easy its charm.
INTENT TO DESTROY: DEATH, DENIAL & DEPICTION 9 p.m. on Starz; also on iTunes and Amazon. As World War I unfolded, some 1.5 million Armenians in the Ottoman Empire were killed in what historians have long considered a genocide. Yet for a century, the Turkish government has denied the tragedy and muzzled efforts to revisit it by coercing media companies and other governments to do the same. This documentary details that systemic suppression through archival footage and historical insight. “While there may be no completely dispassionate way to discuss its topic,” Ken Jaworowski wrote in The New York Times, “the film’s balance of emotion and composure helps make its stories even stronger.” Much of “Intent to Destroy” captures the production of “THE PROMISE,” a romantic epic set during the war. Stream it on Amazon, Google Play, Vudu or YouTube.
McMAFIA 11:10 p.m. on AMC. This coproduction of the BBC and AMC included a roster of international actors when it debuted in February. Created by Hossein Amini (“The Wings of the Dove”) and James Watkins (“The Woman in Black”) and inspired by a book of the same name, “McMafia” stars James Norton as Alex Godman, a successful first-generation Russian in London who tries to keep his family’s criminal past behind him. At the outset of this eight-part series, Alex is dragged into a web of organized crime involving mafiosos from Israel, India and Russia. In this season finale, Alex is detained in Moscow and must fight for his life.
PASS OVER (2018) on Amazon. Two young, homeless black men, Moses (Jon Michael Hill) and Kitch (Julian Parker), live out a version of “Waiting for Godot” in Spike Lee’s adaptation of the play “Pass Over” by Antoinette Nwandu. As the young men pace a violent street corner, the two banter with each other, wondering when they will “pass over” to better lives. The lens only strays from the curb when it captures the reactions of the audience watching it at the Steppenwolf Theater in Chicago.
A version of this schedule appears in print on April 23, 2018, on Page C7 of the New York edition with the headline: What’s On Monday.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe


