7 Things to Do With Your Kids in NYC This Weekend
Our guide to cultural events in New York City for children and teenagers happening this weekend and in the week ahead.
ARBOR WEEKEND at Wave Hill (April 27-29 at various times). In the Dr. Seuss picture book “The Lorax,” the fuzzy title character says he speaks for the trees. So does Wave Hill at this annual celebration, which offers an opportunity for children 5 and older to do something rarely permitted at a public garden: climb one of its specimens. On Saturday from 11 a.m. to 3 p.m., at the Junior Arborist Station, professionals will answer questions and help young visitors put on harnesses and hard hats for a safe ascent into the canopy of a sugar maple for a commanding view of the landscape. Other activities include a family art project on Saturday and Sunday, from 10 a.m. to 1 p.m., in which children will make bark rubbings and incorporate them into collaged designs, and a family nature walk with an environmental educator, on Sunday at 1 p.m., in which participants will investigate the parts and life cycles of trees.718-549-3200, wavehill.org
BIG SWIM BIG KICK at Asphalt Green, Upper East Side Campus (April 28, 11 a.m.-4:30 p.m.). Young sports enthusiasts will get lots of kicks — in all senses of the word — at this free festival of swimming and soccer, presented by this Manhattan fitness nonprofit. Open to children ages 6 through 10 (except swimmers who are already members of competitive teams), the event will host indoor pool races for each age group, starting at noon, and outdoor soccer activities, also at noon. And no one should worry about performance: Each participant will take home a T-shirt and a medal. (Registration, which can be done on site, is required; a full schedule is on the website.) Asphalt Green will provide extra fun for spectators, too: Adult athletes will exhibit their skills, and the swimmer Dana Vollmer, an Olympic gold medalist, and Becky Burleigh, head women’s soccer coach at the University of Florida, will greet little sports fans. 212-369-8890, asphaltgreen.org
‘DON QUIXOTE TAKES NEW YORK’ at La MaMa (through May 6). The hero of this production is more likely to tilt at skyscrapers than at windmills. An adaptation of an adaptation, it sets Iván Cardozo and Beatriz Caballero’s puppet theater version of Cervantes’s novel in New York City, where Don Quixote and Sancho Panza are trying to shield the Statue of Liberty from a villain known as the Orange Knight. Although adults may detect political satire here, young theatergoers can have fun just watching the onstage adventure, created by Federico Restrepo and Denise Greber. Part of the La MaMa Kids series and presented by Loco7 Dance Puppet Theater Company, the show, playing weekends at noon, uses live music, movement, video animation and puppets and props that are sometimes larger than the actors.212-352-3101, lamama.org
‘GENIUSES’ at Tada! Youth Theater (April 28-May 20). There’s a reason that the words “evil” and “genius” are sometimes paired. In this new musical, with a book and lyrics by Jon Agee and a score by Dan Feigelson, two students from a school for children whose learning styles are outside the mainstream sneak into an exclusive institution for those with extraordinarily high I.Q.s. In addition to creating some welcome disruption, the infiltrators discover that one of the elite school’s pupils is bent on world domination. The show is performed by a cast that knows all about student life: the members of the Tada! Resident Youth Ensemble, ages 8 through 18. 212-252-1619, ext. 5; tadatheater.com 
‘LEGO BRICKS: A CELEBRATION!’ OPENING PARTY at Scandinavia House (April 28, 3-5 p.m.). Where in New York City can you find more than 30,000 loose Lego bricks just waiting to be played with? (Yes, that means other than under your own sofa cushions, bed covers and carpets.) The answer is Scandinavia House, the center for Nordic culture, which is honoring the 60th anniversary of this signature Danish invention with the exhibition “Lego Bricks: A Celebration!” Opening on Saturday with snacks, live music and other free festivities, it features thousands of the building pieces within an interactive play zone. It also details the Lego Group’s history: The name comes from the first two letters of each of the words in the Danish phrase “lege godt,” which means “play well.” On view through Aug. 4 and accompanied by a series of children’s workshops, the exhibition demonstrates what a talented grown-up can do with Lego, too: The artist Sean Kenney has created mosaics, busts, models of plants, reproductions of architectural landmarks and even larger-than-life sculptures.212-779-3587, scandinaviahouse.org
OPEN STUDIO FOR ‘NICK MAUSS: TRANSMISSIONS’ at the Whitney Museum of American Art (April 28, 10:30 a.m.-3 p.m.). Ballet is often much more than movement: It can also incorporate costume design, visual art, acting and storytelling, disciplines that the artist Nick Mauss explores in “Transmissions,” his installation at the Whitney. In this program, young visitors can investigate them, too. (A parental advisory: The exhibition, on a different floor from the open studio, includes some nude photographs.) Alexandra Albrecht, a member of Mr. Mauss’s rotating cast of performers — the exhibition features live dances daily — will appear at the open studio from 11 a.m. to 1 p.m., showing participants how to shape their bodies to reflect personas. Family members will work together to create their own costumes and characters, posing for take-home collaborative portraits that Whitney staff members will photograph.212-570-3600, whitney.org/events
‘THE POLAR BEARS GO UP’ at Flushing Town Hall (April 28, 2:15 p.m.). To many people, polar bears, which inhabit the Arctic Circle, are already pretty far up. But in this production, they go way, way up — into the atmosphere. Created and performed by Eilidh MacAskill and Fiona Manson and presented by the London-based Unicorn Theater, this Queens show focuses on the title characters’ comic efforts to retrieve a balloon, which include energetic leaps, tree climbing and ultimately a rocket launch. Although a preshow movement-and-music workshop with the cast, at 12:30 p.m., has very few available spaces, plenty of seats remain for the performance, a wordless 50-minute journey that is geared to preschool travelers.718-463-7700, ext. 222; flushingtownhall.org
A version of this article appears in print on April 27, 2018, on Page C28 of the New York edition with the headline: For Children.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe


