Julian Barnes on ‘The Only Story’
Subscribe: iTunes | Google Play Music
“I think my books often vary quite sharply, one from the last,” Julian Barnes says on this week’s podcast. But he allows that his latest novel, “The Only Story,” has a connection to his Booker Prize-winning “The Sense of an Ending.” The new novel is “about a relationship between a young man and a middle-aged woman, which was central to the other book but absolutely not described,” he says. “The reader had to intuit what happened. It must be related to that, that I thought I would write about it more overtly this time.”
In discussing “The Only Story,” Mr. Barnes talks about the experience of love itself and, among other things, how difficult it is to analyze love, especially the first time you feel it. “It’s a bit like putting in a new kitchen,” he says. “You never get it right the first time. You always have that bit of slate you shouldn’t have, or the taps are in the wrong place. And then you redesign and have another kitchen, and there are different mistakes made.”
Also on this week’s episode, Lawrence Wright talks about “God Save Texas: A Journey Into the Soul of the Lone Star State”; Alexandra Alter has news from the literary world; and Lauren Christensen, Tina Jordan and John Williams discuss what people are reading. Pamela Paul is the host.
Here are the books mentioned in this week’s “What We’re Reading”:
“The Bridegroom Was a Dog” by Yoko Tawada
“Cost” by Roxana Robinson
“This Could Hurt” by Jillian Medoff
“The Corrections” by Jonathan Franzen
“A Higher Loyalty” by James Comey
“Educated” by Tara Westover
We would love to hear your thoughts about this episode, and about the Book Review’s podcast in general. You can send them to books@nytimes.com.
From a desktop or laptop, you can listen by pressing play on the button above.
Or if you’re on a mobile device, the instructions below will help you find and subscribe to the series.
1. Open your podcast app. It’s a pre-loaded app called “Podcasts” with a purple icon.
2. Search for the series. Tap on the “search” magnifying glass icon at the bottom of the screen, type in “Inside The New York Times Book Review” and select it from the list of results.
3. Subscribe. Once on the series page, tap on the “subscribe” button to have new episodes sent to your phone free. You may want to adjust your notifications to be alerted when a new episode arrives.
4. Or just sample. If you would rather listen to an episode or two before deciding to subscribe, just tap on the episode title from the list on the series page. If you have an internet connection, you’ll be able to stream the episode.
On your Android phone or tablet:
1. Open your podcast app. It’s a pre-loaded app called “Play Music” with an orange-and-yellow icon.
2. Search for the series. Click on the magnifying glass icon at the top of the screen, search for the name of the series, and select it from the list of results. You might have to scroll down to find the “Podcasts” search results.
3. Subscribe. Once on the series page, click on the word “subscribe” to have new episodes sent to your phone for free.
4. Or just sample. If you would rather listen to an episode or two before deciding to subscribe, just click on the episode title from the list on the series page. If you have an internet connection, you’ll be able to stream the episode.
