Soogil, From a Former Hanjan Chef, Opens in the East Village
SOOGIL Early in his career, Soogil Lim, a native of South Korea, switched from academia — biology — to food, and eventually graduated from the Culinary Institute of America in Hyde Park, N.Y. He became a sous-chef at Daniel, then moved on to be executive chef at Hanjan in the Flatiron district. Now he’s on his own, with a personal take on Korean food. Brussels sprouts are tossed with pan-fried tofu, peanuts and crispy seaweed; a mung bean pancake is made with sprouts, kimchi and lard; root vegetables and soy sauce accompany braised short ribs; flaked cod comes with soy-braised radish; and spicy soft tofu with assorted seafood swim in a seafood broth. His intimate restaurant, seating fewer than 40, is a study in neutral tones, enlivened with art and Korean pottery: 108 East Fourth Street (First Avenue), 646-838-5524, soogil.com.
TACOMBI The fifth and largest branch of this Mexican restaurant featuring tacos is opening in the Empire State Building. The vibrant décor reflects the building’s Art Deco style. An open kitchen, where Vista Hermosa, the Mexican food company owned by Tacombi, will also be making fresh masa and tortillas, anchors part of the space. Agave spirits and fresh juices are a feature of the bar. The menu offers a dozen tacos inspired by various Mexican regions, but with street food inclinations, thanks to fillings like the classic pork al pastor. Quesadillas, filled flour tortillas (campechanos), rice and beans, and guacamole round out the menu. (Opens Thursday): 23 West 33rd Street, 212-967-5555, tacombi.com.
WEST-BOURNE Camilla Marcus, an entrepreneur in restaurants and technology, is opening this cafe focusing on two culinary styles, vegetarian and Californian. A mushroom Reuben sandwich is among the dishes from the chef, Amy Yi. Through a partnership arranged with the nonprofit Robin Hood Foundation, Ms. Marcus, a Los Angeles native, will donate a portion of every sale to the Door, an organization that offers job training for young people and immigrants, some of whom she employs. (Wednesday): 137 Sullivan Street (Prince Street), 347-534-3050 westbourne.com.
THE RAG TRADER This garment district newcomer, in a former clothing factory, pays homage to its past not only with its name but also with vintage artifacts like old sewing machines. The multilevel space is divided into a collection of areas for dining and drinking. The chef, Justin Ottervanger, prepares gastro-pub fare like sriracha deviled eggs, baby back ribs, pizza, beef tartare, mussels, and hanger steak frites. The basement houses the Bo Peep Cocktail & Highball Store, taking its name from a company, Bo Peep Manufacturing, that once occupied the premises: 70 West 36th Street, 917-2612-5495, ragtradernyc.com.
2 SPRING Jesse Schenker, the chef who has closed both his Manhattan restaurants, Recette and the Gander, is opening on Nassau County’s Gold Coast. The menu is American, buffed with touches like a smoked fish dip alongside crudités, linguine with clams in a shellfish bisque, arugula and ricotta salata in the kale salad, and lobster spiced with harissa and served with a savory bread pudding. He plans to continue his program, started in Manhattan, of offering 10-course tasting menus on alternate Monday evenings. (Wednesday): 2 Spring Street, Oyster Bay, N.Y., 516-624-2411, 2springstreet.com.
DUE WEST The emphasis is as much on drinks as it is on food at this West Village spot conceived by a team of owners, some of whom are veterans of Locanda Verde. A highlight of the cocktail list is a craft-your-own old-fashioned. Adabis Castro, who was at Atrium Dumbo and Le Bilboquet, is the chef, offering raw bar selections, bar snacks like chickpea fritters, small plates like beef tartare, and more substantial whole fluke and chicken dishes. The décor leans toward luxe, and there’s contemporary art on the walls. (Wednesday): 189 West 10th Street (Bleecker Street), 646-687-4609, duewestnyc.com.
ZAVO RESTAURANT & LOUNGE This lavish two-story Mediterranean restaurant with an emphasis on steakhouse fare is owned by Michael and Ilya Zavolun, who have had an elaborate catering hall in Elmhurst, Queens, for years. In the ground-floor dining room of their new Manhattan restaurant, not to be confused with Lavo nearby, some of the dishes take their inspiration from Greece and Morocco. The second floor is for private events, and also offers themed evening entertainment, like a Russian night on Thursdays and a Moroccan night on Wednesdays: 1011 Third Avenue (60th Street), 212-753-5500, zavonyc.com.
BARO BY CHEFS SOCIETY A think tank organization of chefs and food personalities, Chefs Society, has developed this Korean gastro pub, bringing a modern culinary outlook to Manhattan’s Koreatown. The spacious wood-paneled restaurant with a long bar and a menu of many traditional and updated Korean dishes like braised pork belly on endives, kimchi beef sliders with aioli, seafood and scallion pancakes, and Korean-style fried chicken wings with assorted sauces. Wine lovers should note the relatively gentle $30 per bottle corkage, and allowing two bottles for two people: 34 West 32nd Street, 212-736-0029, baronyc.com.
NEW YORK SUSHI KO The sushi chef John Daley, who has wielded the yanagiba knife at his eight-seat omakase counter since June 2013, will close after service on Saturday: 91 Clinton Street (Rivington Street), 917-734-5857, newyorksushiko.com.
LANGAN’S PUB & RESTAURANT Last call will be Jan. 18 at this theater district institution, which has been pouring beer from a long list and serving bangers and mash, burgers and corned beef for nearly 25 years. A rent increase is putting it out of business. The New York Post reported the news on Monday: 150 West 47th Street, 212-869-5482, langans.com.
ATLANTIC GRILL This popular Upper East Side fish house from BR Guest Restaurants has closed after two decades. The newer Lincoln Center branch remains open. Along with Ocean Grill and Isabella’s, it’s another casualty on the list of BR Guest restaurants created by Stephen Hanson, who ran the company until 2013.
GREENWICH GRILLE This West Village spot has closed. It opened last fall to replace 33 Greenwich, with Harold Moore, formerly of Commerce and now at Harold’s Meat & Three, in the kitchen.
VERMILION The sprawling Midtown branch of Rohini Dey’s modern Indian restaurant, with roots in Chicago, has closed after nine years. During its residence in New York, Ms. Dey was a champion of women in the restaurant business.
WASSAIL The holiday season is over, and this celebration of cider on the Lower East Side has also ended its nearly three-year run.
Follow NYT Food on Facebook, Instagram, Twitter and Pinterest. Get regular updates from NYT Cooking, with recipe suggestions, cooking tips and shopping advice.
