Bistrot Leo, Replacing Sessanta, Opens in SoHo
BISTROT LEO After saying goodbye to Sessanta, his Italian restaurant in the hotel at 60 Thompson Street in SoHo, John McDonald has rolled out the welcome mat for this French bistro, its replacement. He hired Brian Loiacono, 30, whose experience includes many years at Daniel Boulud’s restaurants, so snails, foie gras, rillettes, steak frites, petits pois, potato-crusted black sea bass and a stunning crown roast of lamb with asparagus are now on the menu. Mr. McDonald said that a profusion of Italian restaurants and a shortage of French ones downtown had influenced his decision. He has tinkered with the space, creating a cafe area that spills onto the street, shortening the bar for tables, adding floral-patterned wallpaper, and, in a daring move, using tablecloths in the main dining room: Sixty SoHo Hotel, 60 Thompson Street (Broome Street), 212-219-8119, bistrotleo.com.
SERRA BY BIRRERIA Eataly’s rooftop restaurant and microbrewery, Birreria, which changes its theme twice a year, will represent the atmosphere and food of the Italian countryside this season. (Thursday): Eataly, 200 Fifth Avenue (23rd Street), 212-937-8910, eataly.com.
SUSHI INOUE This sushi palace in the heart of Harlem with a Michelin star and several omakase options will open a sprawling edition near Lincoln Center in the former Picholine space. In contrast to the tiny, intimate sushi bars throughout the city, this one will seat about 150. It is expected to open in the fall: 35 West 64th Street.
HARWOOD ON HUDSON Lisa Murphy Harwood and Terry Harwood, who branched out from their popular Shelter Island spot, Vine Street Café, with Cove Hollow Tavern in East Hampton last year, will unveil this restaurant in Manhattan. Here, their partners are Kim Nguyen and Bill Block. It is to open in late spring with Mr. Harwood as chef and his wife handling pastry. They plan to offer a menu that includes bluefish pâté and pastrami-spiced pork ribs along with Vine Street Café’s Bolognese: 430 Hudson Street (Morton Street).
 CLAUDIO’S The beacon, owned by the same family, on the Greenport, N.Y., waterfront since 1870, has changed hands. The new owners and former regulars, Perry Weitz, David Weitz, Ian Behar and Ryan Sasson, bought it from Kathy and Janice Claudio. To run it, they have hired Tora Matsuoka, who owns Sen restaurant in Sag Harbor, and Stephen Loffredo, a Manhattan restaurateur who owned Zoe in SoHo. Claudio’s satellites, Claudio’s Clam Bar and Crabby Jerry’s, are also part of the deal. All the restaurants are to reopen by Memorial Day weekend: 111 Main Street, Greenport, N.Y.
NY CAKE In February, this family-run emporium for baking and confectionary supplies previously announced that it would be closing its location at 56 West 22nd Street in June. Now, the owners have found another location nearby and plan to reopen in September: 118 West 22nd Street.
VAN LEEUWEN ARTISAN ICE CREAM This Brooklyn company that started with a truck in 2008 is expanding, adding five scoop shops, mostly in Manhattan, to the seven it already has in New York. The first, at 45 Spring Street (Mulberry Street), will open April 19. Stores on the Upper West Side, SoHo, Upper East Side and Prospect Heights, Brooklyn, will open between May and late July.
JONATHAN BENNO, formerly at Lincoln Ristorante, will be doing a multifaceted project in the Evelyn hotel in NoMad. It will include Leonelli Focacceria e Pasticceria, a Roman-style bakery and cafe, and Leonelli Taberna, a Roman trattoria with rustic Italian fare, both to open in early June. Benno, a fine-dining Mediterranean restaurant, is set to open in September. All are at 7 East 27th Street.
MARGARITA VILLEGAS LEAL, who owns a cooking school in Tlatlauquitepec, in the state of Puebla, Mexico, will be in New York on May 2 and 3, cooking mole dinners at Casa Pública in Williamsburg, Brooklyn, in a run-up to Cinco de Mayo. Gustavo Ortega-Oyarzun, the beverage director of Casa Pública, and the chef Fany Gerson, met Ms. Villegas Leal while on a trip to Puebla. They were impressed with what she was doing, and plans were made for her to come to New York. There will be two seatings, at 6:30 and 9 p.m. for the five-course dinners, $65 per person, plus tax and tip. Some proceeds will support the cooking school in Mexico. Reservations and information are at casapublicabk.com and resy.com: 594 Union Avenue (Richardson Street), Williamsburg, Brooklyn, 718-388-3555.
DAVID BURKE, the chef whose home base is Manhattan, has added another somewhat distant project to his portfolio. In addition to consulting for the Garden City Hotel on Long Island, he is also overseeing the restaurants and food service for the restored, historic Adelphi Hotel in Saratoga Springs, N.Y., a project that had been initiated by Gray Kunz. Mr. Burke is the culinary director for the steakhouse restaurant Salt & Char owned by the hotel and adjacent to it, and is also revising the menus at the Blue Hen and Morrissey’s Lounge in the hotel. But Salt & Char should be just the ticket for this chef whose signature is the use of blocks of pink Himalayan salt.
Follow NYT Food on Facebook, Instagram, Twitter and Pinterest. Get regular updates from NYT Cooking, with recipe suggestions, cooking tips and shopping advice.
