Radiohead Denies Suing Lana Del Rey Over Copyright (but Still Wants Credit)
It may have been an irresistible headline: Radiohead sues Lana Del Rey!
The old guard versus the new. Lawyers ganging up on an artist. Copyright litigation gone amok.
The reality is more complicated. But only slightly.
On Sunday, Ms. Del Rey confirmed a report in a British newspaper that Radiohead was considering suing her over her song “Get Free,” arguing that it sounded similar to Radiohead’s breakthrough 1993 hit “Creep.” The band was said to want songwriting credit, money or both.
“It’s true about the lawsuit,” Ms. Del Rey wrote on Twitter. The band had rejected her offer of 40 percent of the song’s publishing royalties, she claimed, demanding 100 percent. “Their lawyers have been relentless,” she added, “so we will deal with it in court.”
Tweets and news reports quickly embellished this to say that a suit had been filed. At a concert in Denver on Sunday, Ms. Del Rey stoked the fires herself by warning that the song might disappear from “future physical releases” of her latest album, “Lust for Life.”
“Get Free,” it seemed, was the latest victim of the so-called “Blurred Lines” effect: a new song accused of stealing from an old one by borrowing chords, texture or “feel,” the kind of generic elements that have long been considered fair game.
But on Tuesday, after a few days of silence, Radiohead’s music publisher, Warner/Chappell, made a statement confirming that it had requested credit for Radiohead, but denying that it wanted all of Ms. Del Rey’s songwriting money.
“As Radiohead’s music publisher, it’s true that we’ve been in discussions since August of last year with Lana Del Rey’s representatives,” a spokesman for the company said in a statement. “It’s clear that the verses of ‘Get Free’ use musical elements found in the verses of ‘Creep’ and we’ve requested that this be acknowledged in favor of all writers of ‘Creep.’ To set the record straight, no lawsuit has been issued and Radiohead have not said they ‘will only accept 100%’ of the publishing of ‘Get Free.’”
A spokesman for Radiohead said the band had no further comment.
The complexity — and, some say, the absurdity — of music copyright suits is on display in the case of “Get Free,” since Radiohead itself was the subject of an earlier plagiarism accusation over “Creep.”
Publishers of “The Air That I Breathe,” a Top 10 hit for the Hollies in 1974, accused Radiohead of stealing that song, including its chord progression. As a result, “Creep” now officially credits Radiohead as well as the two writers of “The Air That I Breathe,” Mike Hazlewood and Albert Hammond.
If Warner/Chappell’s efforts are successful, Mr. Hazlewood and Mr. Hammond would also be credited, alongside the members of Radiohead and the three writers currently listed: Rick Nowles, Kieron Menzies and Ms. Del Rey.
A version of this article appears in print on January 10, 2018, on Page C3 of the New York edition with the headline: Radiohead Denies Suing Lana Del Rey.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe


