Carnegie Hall’s Season Will Focus on M.T.T., Yuja Wang and Chris Thile
Carnegie Hall will open its season with Gershwin for the second year in a row this fall, the hall said Thursday as it announced its 2018-19 plans. The new season will focus on the conductor Michael Tilson Thomas, the pianist Yuja Wang and the mandolin player Chris Thile — who will become the rare nonclassical composer to be given the hall’s prestigious composer in residence position.
The hall’s annual festival will be called “Migrations: The Making of America” and will explore the musical traditions created by immigrants from Scotland and Ireland during the 18th and 19th centuries; Jews from Russia and Eastern Europe at the turn of the 20th; and black Americans who left the South during the Great Migration.
“Virtually all of those migrations happened for the worst possible reasons — be it starvation, persecution, people being treated in the most terrible ways,” Clive Gillinson, Carnegie’s executive and artistic director, said in an interview. “And out of that came some of the greatest beauty, and some of the most extraordinary, wonderful experiences.”
The decision to give Mr. Thile the hall’s Debs Composer’s Chair is something of a break with tradition. Mr. Thile, who is best known for his work with Nickel Creek and Punch Brothers and as the host of the public radio show “Live from Here,” is only the second nonclassical composer to be given the position, which has been held by the likes of Pierre Boulez, John Adams and Meredith Monk.
“We will definitely be moving across a broader canvas there,” Mr. Gillinson said of the composer position, noting that it was previously held by Brad Mehldau, the pianist and composer who sometimes plays with Mr. Thile. Mr. Thile will give several concerts, including one in May that will feature performances by both Nickel Creek and Punch Brothers.
Here are some highlights of the season.
Carnegie is devoting a Perspectives series to Mr. Thomas, the conductor known as M.T.T., who plans to wrap up a 25-year run as the music director of the San Francisco Symphony in 2020. Even before the season starts, he will lead Carnegie’s National Youth Orchestra of the United States of America at the hall and on a tour of Asia.
Mr. Thomas will open the season proper on Oct. 3, leading the San Francisco Symphony in music of Gershwin and Ravel in a concert featuring Renée Fleming and Audra McDonald; he and the orchestra will return the following evening for a Stravinsky program with the violinist Leonidas Kavakos. Mr. Thomas will later in the season conduct the Vienna Philharmonic in music by Ives and Mahler, as well as Beethoven’s Piano Concerto No. 3, with Igor Levit, who recently won the Gilmore Artist Award, as soloist. (Mr. Levit plays a recital in October.)
Finally, Mr. Thomas will return with the New World Symphony, the orchestral academy he co-founded, for concerts featuring Carnegie’s other Perspectives artist, Ms. Wang, in Prokofiev’s Piano Concerto No. 5.
Ms. Wang, a technically dazzling pianist, will be showcased in a variety of settings in her own series: She will play arrangements of Bartok’s Sonata for Two Pianos and Percussion and Stravinsky’s “Rite of Spring” with a quartet of percussionists, including Martin Grubinger, and collaborate in other concerts with Mr. Kavakos, the violinist; the comedy team of Igudesman & Joo; and the cellist Gautier Capuçon, with whom she will play Franck and Rachmaninoff.
John Eliot Gardiner will lead the Orchestre Révolutionnaire et Romantique in two Berlioz programs, including the “Symphonie Fantastique” and “Lélio.” Valery Gergiev will conduct the Mariinsky Orchestra in a concert performance of Tchaikovsky’s “The Nutcracker.” The Czech Philharmonic and its new chief conductor, Semyon Bychkov, will perform a Dvorak program featuring the cellist Alisa Weilerstein. Ivan Fischer brings his Budapest Festival Orchestra for two nights of Bartok.
Andris Nelsons will lead the Boston Symphony Orchestra in a Strauss program featuring Ms. Fleming singing selections from “Capriccio,” and Thomas Adès will lead the ensemble and Kirill Gerstein in the New York premiere of his piano concerto. (Mr. Adès and Mr. Gerstein also play a two-piano concert.) Yannick Nézet-Séguin will conduct two of his orchestras: He will be back in front of the Philadelphia Orchestra for three concerts, and will lead the Met Orchestra, where he is the music director designate, in Mahler’s “Rückert Lieder” and Bruckner’s Symphony No. 7.
The elusive tenor Jonas Kaufmann, who defied expectations by not canceling his Schubert recital at Carnegie this month, is scheduled to return in October to sing music from German operettas and films of the 1920s and ’30s. Anna Netrebko, herself a multiple canceler on Carnegie in the past, will give a recital in December. The countertenor Iestyn Davies, currently appearing on Broadway in “Farinelli and the King,” will join the lutenist Thomas Dunford in a program featuring music by Dowland, Purcell and Handel. And the mezzo-soprano J’Nai Bridges will sing songs and spirituals.
There will be larger-scale vocal performances, too. Gianandrea Noseda will bring back the forces of the Teatro Regio of Torino, Italy, for a concert performance of Verdi’s “I Vespri Siciliani,” starring Angela Meade. And Harry Bicket will conduct the English Concert in Handel’s “Semele.”
Jordi Savall and Le Concert des Nations will play a program based on “Tous les Matins du Monde,” the film whose soundtrack Mr. Savall recorded in 1991 and featuring music by Lully, Marais, Sainte-Colombe, Couperin and Leclair.
Julia Wolfe’s “Anthracite Fields,” which won the Pulitzer Prize in 2015, will be performed in Zankel Hall by the Bang on a Can All-Stars and the Choir of Trinity Wall Street, conducted by Julian Wachner. The world premiere of David Lang’s cycle “the writings” will be given by the vocal ensemble Theatre of Voices, and the New York premiere of a new work by Andrew Norman will be given by yMusic in May.
