The Grammy Gems You Won’t Hear on ‘Music’s Biggest Night’
This year at the 60th annual Grammy Awards, you will see Kendrick Lamar and Rihanna, U2 and Bruno Mars. The show, which will be broadcast live Sunday night from Madison Square Garden, is designed as a showcase of the leading lights in American pop music, with an emphasis on glitz and broad accessibility.
But the Grammys are also an awards platform that recognizes music in a wide range of categories, 84 in total, most of which never make it to the television screen (apart from a text scroll at the bottom). Often the nominees in the major competitions — album, song and record of the year — inspire loud debates, whether about the age of the nominees (generally older) or their race (generally white, though less so this year) or their gender (generally male).
But the smaller categories can be just as baffling. Part of the problem stems from how the nominees are selected: In a system that can favor campaigning and name recognition over creative merit, the results are often unpredictable and deliriously wrongheaded.
And yet the seeming arbitrariness of the Grammy nominating process sometimes provides left-field gifts: unexpectedly excellent nominees in categories that almost certainly will not be televised in prime time. Here is a selection of 17 under-heralded artists as worthy, if not more so, than their better-known compatriots.
The Grammys have been flubbing their relationship with heavy metal since Jethro Tull beat Metallica for best hard rock/heavy metal recording in 1989, the first year that the genre was acknowledged with its own award. This year, the National Academy of Recording Arts & Sciences still got it wrong, yet somehow stumbled into grace. Best metal performance might feature the most impressive array of nominees in any single category, though at the risk of being unreasonably taxonomic, not all of them are strictly metal. Code Orange is a ferocious Pittsburgh band that’s rooted in hardcore but leans in vigorously to metalcore. August Burns Red, also from Pennsylvania, is another strong metalcore band. And then there’s Body Count, in which Ice-T — who once barked about killing police officers and now plays one on television — returns with high-energy, political rap-rock.
One of last year’s definitive country songs was Midland’s “Drinkin’ Problem,” which walked a tightrope between country and soft rock, classic and modern, serious and parodic. Midland is a trio with a dangerously honed sense of aesthetics and a deadpan sense of humor, which is why “Drinkin’ Problem” — nominated for best country song and best country duo/group performance — can be read either as hopeless melancholy or as laughing ever so gently in the face of tragedy. Just take the balmy chorus, which concludes with last year’s best turn of phrase: “People say I got a drinkin’ problem/But I got no problem drinkin’ at all.”
Recent years have seen agonizing over the reframing of the how the Grammys treat R&B made by younger artists, but there is just as much confusion about how the Recording Academy handles R&B made by artists who have been making music for quite some time. This year, there are two comeback projects nominated in wildly different categories. The Baylor Project is a husband-and-wife team — Marcus Baylor of the Yellowjackets and his wife Jean, who sang in the 1990s club-soul outfit Zhané — with a tasteful independent release nominated in best jazz vocal album and best traditional R&B performance. And India.Arie — who in 2002 was nominated for seven Grammys and lost them all, one of the ceremony’s most brutal shutouts — is nominated in a category that might have healing in its DNA: best new age album.
At one end of contemporary gospel are the singer-arrangers feverishly trying to keep up with the mainstream of R&B and hip-hop. But two of the best gospel singers nominated for Grammys this year take a decidedly different tack. CeCe Winans released an outstanding, intimate back-to-basics album, “Let Them Fall in Love,” which convincingly revisited the gospel and soul music of the 1960s. Le’Andria  isn’t looking to the past for sonic inspiration, but she achieves a similar warmth on “Bigger Than Me,” which, like “Let Them Fall in Love,” is nominated for best gospel album. (Both women are also nominated for best gospel performance/song.)
There is often a meditative moan at the core of much contemporary Christian rock, but rarely is there a real growl. For this reason alone, Zach Williams’s “Chain Breaker,” nominated for best contemporary Christian music album, is refreshing. Mr. Williams sings with real heaviness, enacting a tactile cycle of exhaustion and redemption. There isn’t quite that ambiguity on “The Best of the Collingsworth Family — Volume 1,” the Collingsworth Family compilation nominated for best roots gospel album. Instead, these songs — many rooted in the sounds of the 1950s — succeed because of their utter certainty, stacked with indestructibly saccharine harmonies.
A few years ago, in an unpopular decision, the Recording Academy collapsed a range of disparate styles — polka, zydeco, Hawaiian, Native American music and more — into one category, best regional roots music album. Comparing across styles isn’t inherently flawed — plenty of Grammy categories are cross-genre — but the loss of the style-specific categories means less exposure for worthy acts helping to preserve and advance the various American styles perpetually on the edge of extinction. This year, there are strong traditionalist entries from Dwayne Dopsie and the Zydeco Hellraisers (“Top of the Mountain”) and Northern Cree (“Miyo Kekisepa, Make a Stand [Live]”), a powwow group from Alberta, Canada. And in “Kalenda,” the Lost Bayou Ramblers embark on a kind of prog-Cajun journey that takes earthy sounds to space.
The historically minded categories at the Grammys are generally among the most exciting, even if they’re underexposed. This year’s nominees for best historical album include a pair of records that open new pathways for understanding the roots of American music. “Washington Phillips and His Manzarene Dreams” is an excellent collection of the extant work of Mr. Phillips, a gentle Texas gospel singer of the early 1900s who sang accompanied by an instrument of his own creation, the manzarene. And “Big Bend Killing: The Appalachian Ballad Tradition” is a strong collection of contemporary renditions of vintage Appalachian songs. Also nominated are two anthologies that deepen understanding of Africa in its post-colonial transition: “Bobo Yéyé: Belle Époque in Upper Volta” and “Sweet as Broken Dates: Lost Somali Tapes From the Horn of Africa,” both of which showcase music that’s fantastically hybridized.
A version of this article appears in print on January 27, 2018, on Page C1 of the New York edition with the headline: Grammy Gems in the Shadows.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe


