Turnstile Knows Hardcore’s Rules. That’s Why It Can Break Them.
In 2018, few genres wrestle with the idea of purity the way hardcore does. In a music ecosystem that increasingly prizes fluidity, it is the rare space that still gamely flaunts its ideology as an asset, not a liability.
So what’s most striking about some of the bands that have found broad success in and out of the scene in recent years is their flexibility. In a realm where trying new things has roughly equated to trampling on history, there has been an increasing tolerance of innovation, especially from bands that are experts at the foundation.
Almost no band is more effective at this tightrope walk than Turnstile, a multiracial five-piece outfit from Baltimore with rigorous bona fides and an unerring instinct to color just beyond the lines in ways that unflamboyantly but purposefully illuminate the beauty of the lines themselves.
“Time & Space” is its outstanding second album, just over 25 minutes long, and an urgent, clear and bruising statement of purpose. On the one hand, it is a pointed and accomplished straight-ahead hardcore album: fast, breathless, tingly. The guitarists Brady Ebert and Pat McCrory are concise and snarling. Take “Big Smile,” a 90-second howl and sprint, and the title track, only slightly longer — songs that barely veer from the genre’s blueprint.
And then there’s the frontman Brendan Yates, who screams with just the right blend of aggression and restraint. Sometimes he’s looking inward, like on “(Lost Another) Piece of My World” — “When future finally arrived, I learned/that what I give is what I get in return” — but more often he’s pushing back against implied authoritarianism: “They want to take!/My right to be!” he yelps on “Right to Be.”
But this album also has moments of lightness, mild turns in complementary directions that add breathing room and complexity: flickers of Metallica on “(Lost Another) Piece of My World,” Bad Brains (“I Don’t Wanna Be Blind”) and maybe Queens of the Stone Age (“Generator”). Thanks to the bassist Franz Lyons, Turnstile is more fluent with groove than many of its peers. And the drummer Daniel Fang serves as a bridge between this band’s two instincts, capable of ferociously linear work when it’s called for but also of leaving room for experimentation.
At what point this ceases to be hardcore might be the fodder of message board debate or jostling in the pit, but it doesn’t much trouble this band, which invited some outside guests to add texture: light R&B drizzles from Tanikka Charraé on “Bomb,” soulful punk lullabies from Sheer Mag’s Tina Halladay on “Moon,” and some perfunctory bleeps and bloops from Diplo on “Right to Be.”
Turnstile isn’t alone in its mission — it walks alongside hardcore bands like Code Orange (whose latest album was produced by Will Yip, who also produced “Time & Space”) and Trash Talk, which has released music on Odd Future’s label. For the last couple of years, at festivals like Nature World Night Out, hardcore and hip-hop have coexisted side by side. (What’s more, the record executive who signed Turnstile is also a rapper, Cody B. Ware of World’s Fair.)
Perhaps there is more logic to this moment in hardcore than is immediately evident, because strangely, and somewhat unexpectedly, the mantle of heavy music in pop has over the last year or so migrated into hip-hop, thanks to the emergence of SoundCloud rap, which in its purest early form was as dogmatic as hardcore.
Much of that is owed to the producer Ronny J, who was responsible for several of the scene’s earliest hits (Smokepurpp’s “Audi,” Lil Pump’s “Molly”). The lineage is clear on “OMGRONNY,” his first full-length release, and the most effective of any of the first wave of SoundCloud rap albums. (The others, released by rappers, tend to muddle the sound, suggesting a tug of war between the aggression of the original idea and the impulse to become more mainstream.)
Ronny J isn’t similarly burdened: “OMGRONNY” — which features vocals from a retinue of Florida-based SoundCloud rappers — is intense and dirty, and something like punk. His production is menacing and to-the-point, deploying distorted drums with military precision. “Trauma,” featuring Nell and Danny Towers, is beautifully clangorous, and “Fiji Island,” featuring Fat Nick, sounds like it’s moving at two speeds at once, slow creep and fast sledgehammer.
“OMGRONNY” is a useful reminder that what united this scene — in so much as it ever was one — was the tenor of the production, followed by the flow patterns it encouraged in its rappers. But this world is diverse. Smokepurpp sounds like a classicist here on “One Time,” but there are also differing styles: the wordy Wifisfuneral (“Snakes”) and Ronny J himself, who sing-raps on several songs using heavy vocal processing. Throughout, though, the bass rattles and shivers, an unnerving commitment to the scene’s rule book, and maybe also its last document.
A version of this review appears in print on February 22, 2018, on Page C5 of the New York edition with the headline: Sure, It’s Hardcore, but Just Medium-Pure.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe


