Review: Daniil Trifonov and His Teacher Dazzle With Dual Virtuosity
Daniil Trifonov, the 26-year-old Russian pianist, composer and budding superstar, has made intriguing choices for his Perspectives series at Carnegie Hall this season.
Last month he proved a sympathetic yet strong collaborator with the baritone Matthias Goerne in Schumann’s “Dichterliebe” and Brahms’s “Four Serious Songs”: The demeaning term “accompanist” never came to mind. But perhaps the most touching evening in the series came on Thursday at Zankel Hall, in a two-piano recital Mr. Trifonov shared with his teacher, Sergei Babayan.
Mr. Trifonov gave the lead to the Armenian-born Mr. Babayan, now an American citizen living in New York who maintains an active international performing career. It is certainly true that not every teacher could hope to hold his own technically in combination with a student as precious as Mr. Trifonov. But the firepower they achieved together is rare among piano duos.
They opened with Schumann’s Andante and Variations in B flat — a lovely work that is not often heard, though Schumann gave it a chance at continued life by eliminating the original two cellos and French horn. Mr. Babayan would state an entire musical sentence as if setting up a challenge for Mr. Trifonov, who would respond with a repeat embellished with a slight, exquisite shift in accentuation or rhythmic twist.
Mozart’s Sonata in D for Two Pianos (K. 448) involves much closer, more intricate interplay and overlappings, and Mr. Babayan and Mr. Trifonov, in a full-blooded performance, seemed of a single mind in touch and style. Arvo Pärt’s “Pari Intervallo” (1976) was altogether different: a chiming, bare-bones piece requiring utter restraint and strict rhythmic discipline. The players captured it beautifully.
But the Slavic half of the program — Rachmaninoff’s two splendid suites for two pianos — seemed what most of the full house (with Russian spoken all around) had come for, and no one could have been disappointed.
The First Suite, which Rachmaninoff described as “musical pictures,” offers a watery opening Barcarolle followed by two moody movements. But the finale — “Easter,” with the clangorous bell sounds so beloved by Rachmaninoff — seals the Russian character. The Second Suite traverses lively march and dance mutations on its way to another rousing finale, a Tarantella à la russe.
Mr. Trifonov and Mr. Babayan ended with full-blown dual virtuosity in what is evidently a favorite encore for their collaborations: Victor Babin’s arrangement of the “Dance of the Tumblers” from Rimsky-Korsakov’s opera “The Snow Maiden.”
A version of this review appears in print on March 5, 2018, on Page C5 of the New York edition with the headline: Dual Virtuosity With Firepower.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe


