10 Dance Performances to See in NYC This Weekend
Our guide to dance performances happening this weekend and in the week ahead.
AILEY II at Ailey Citigroup Theater (March 14-25). The 12 dancers of Ailey II — the second company of Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater — return to New York after a 32-city world tour with two programs and premieres by Juel D. Lane, Renee I. McDonald and Darrell Grand Moultrie. Coming back into the repertory are dances by Jae Man Joo, Bridget L. Moore and the former Ailey dancer Marcus Jarrell Willis. Led by the artistic director Troy Powell, the dancers are the draw. While many move on to the esteemed main company, even the ones who don’t are spilling over with talent. As for the choreography? It’s likely a mix of heartfelt and physical.866-811-4111, alvinailey.org
BRIAN BROOKS DANCE at the Joyce Theater (March 14, 7:30 p.m.; March 15-17, 8 p.m.). The contemporary choreographer Brian Brooks — a favorite of the ballerina Wendy Whelan — returns to the Joyce as the inaugural choreographer in residence of Chicago’s Harris Theater for Music and Dance. In “Prelude,” commissioned by the Harris Theater, he focuses on the concept of undoing as dancers continually rewind their movements. The program also features a revival of “Division,” in which six performers find themselves maneuvering rectangular wooden boards.212-242-0800, joyce.org
CULLEN + THEM: ‘MARK IT IN PENCIL’ at New York Live Arts (March 14, 7 p.m., through March 17). In this work, Hannah Cullen, who presides over this performing arts organization of adult and adolescent dancers, explores ideas about unity and division. Joined by Avery-Jai Andrews, Ramiro Batista, Adriana Santos and members of the Young Dance Collective — its performers are between 11 and 14 — Ms. Cullen uses dance and theater to address gender, sexuality and mental illness. How can conflict be resolved through listening? It’s a theme.212-691-6500, newyorklivearts.org
‘DANCING PLATFORM PRAYING GROUNDS: BLACKNESS, CHURCHES AND DOWNTOWN DANCE’ at Danspace Project and other locations (through March 24). This ongoing platform — a series of performances, talks and walking tours curated by the choreographer Reggie Wilson — examines the cultural, dance and architectural histories of downtown New York and beyond. On Thursday, Mr. Wilson presents a shared evening featuring new works by Keely Garfield, Same as Sister — Briana Brown-Tipley and Hilary Brown — and Ni’Ja Whitson. On Wednesday, the choreographer Emily Johnson explores our relationship with land and indigenous New York in a silent walk through the East Village, which was once part of Lenapehoking, the homeland of the Lenape people. The event is sold out, but there is a waiting list.866-811-4111, danspaceproject.org
‘FROM THE HORSE’S MOUTH’ at the Theater at the 14th Street Y (March 13, 6 p.m.; March 15, 8 p.m., through March 18). The latest iteration of “From the Horse’s Mouth,” the popular series created by Tina Croll and Jamie Cunningham in which figures from the dance world share stories about their careers and lives, focuses on Egyptian dance — specifically the ballet dancer Magda Saleh, as well as the development of ballet and other dance forms in Egypt. Over the course of four days, more than 30 dancers, musicians, historians and choreographers share memories, anecdotes and, of course, dance. The series also features film screenings, including one of “A Footnote in Ballet History?” on Tuesday.212-780-0800, 14streety.org
WENDY OSSERMAN at Theater for the New City (March 14-17, 8 p.m.). The veteran choreographer Wendy Osserman unveils her latest evening of work — with a group of talented dancers, including Joshua Tuason and Cori Kresge — that features the premiere of “Undermine.” Inspired by the current political climate, it draws on concepts from the Native American medicine wheel and features music by Skip LaPlante, who creates scores for traditional and homemade instruments. Also included is “Udjat,” a trio from 1985.212-868-4444, theaterforthenewcity.net
PIGEONWING DANCE at the 92nd Street Y (March 9-10 at 8 p.m.; March 10 at 4 p.m.). The 92nd Street Y Harkness Dance Festival continues with Gabrielle Lamb’s Pigeonwing Dance in an excerpt from “Pathological Curves,” “Torricelli’s Theorem” and a reworked version of “Bewilderness” — inspired by the writings of Rebecca Solnit, the author and activist, on the themes of community, disaster and hope. 212-415-5500, 92y.org
PAUL TAYLOR AMERICAN MODERN DANCE at the David H. Koch Theater (through March 25). The season continues with Taylor classics such as “Musical Offering,” “Runes,” “Arden Court” and the ever-timeless “Esplanade.” But the Paul Taylor Dance Company adds a new choreographer to its mix, too, when Doug Varone’s “Half Life,” set to music by Julia Wolfe, is performed for the first time on Friday evening. And on Wednesday, the Trisha Brown Dance Company offers Ms. Brown’s 1983 work “Set and Reset,” which features music by Laurie Anderson and a set designed by Robert Rauschenberg. It’s a 20th-century gem.212-496-0600, boxoffice.dance
‘WORK UP 4.2’ at the White Box at Gibney (March 9-10, 8 p.m.). Gibney Dance hosts a shared program as part of “Work Up,” its emerging artist series, featuring Babay L. Angles (“May Malas Sa Loob Pero May Datating Pa,” or “There’s Been Wickedness Within but Something Else Is Coming”), J. Bouey (“The Space Between Words”) and Rourou Ye (“Phantom Duet”). Issues on the table? Decolonization, ancestral memory, healing practices and the idea of surrender as an act of self-empowerment.646-837-6809, gibneydance.org
‘ZAUBERNACHT’ at the Museum of Jewish Heritage (March 14-15, 7 p.m.). Jody Oberfelder Projects teams up with the Knickerbocker Chamber Orchestra to present “Zaubernacht,” or “Magic Night,” a reimagining of Kurt Weill’s composition in which a child’s toys come to life. This dance and chamber music work, created with the whole family in mind, will be the first time Weill’s original orchestrations have been heard in New York City since the production’s 1925 premiere in the United States.646-437-4202, mjhnyc.org
A version of this article appears in print on March 9, 2018, on Page C25 of the New York edition.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe


