‘James Levine Is a Conductor, Not a God’: Readers React to His Firing
The Metropolitan Opera fired its longtime conductor James Levine on Monday after an investigation revealed credible evidence that Mr. Levine had engaged in “sexually abusive and harassing conduct.” The news article prompted more than 600 comments from readers.
Zachary Woolfe, the classical music editor for The New York Times, followed up with an essay exploring whether Mr. Levine’s firing was an opportunity to reconsider the vast power given to maestros , which also brought in strong reader reaction.
Many readers wondered how much the Met had known about the allegations against Mr. Levine. Some argued for leniency given Mr. Levine’s strong professional record; others said the Met should be ashamed for not having fired him sooner.
Most agreed that both Mr. Levine’s reputation and that of the Met would suffer in the wake of the situation. On Thursday, Mr. Levine sued the Met for breach of contract and defamation.
These are edited excerpts from readers’ comments.
Many readers suggested that Mr. Levine benefited from a cult of personality at the Met.
I adore opera. But James Levine is a conductor, not a god. The Met would do well to focus fund-raising efforts on educating the public and donors about the artistry, creativity and glorious musicality of opera and making opera more accessible — not creating a deity to be worshiped by New Yorkers. SGL, SETAUKET, N.Y.
Maestro worship is an extension of the high self-regard held by some who patronize the arts. But as in religion and sports, we learn that the higher the fall, the bigger the splat. TONY, WEST VIRGINIA
This article inadvertently highlights another structural problem in the arts: “He made the Met’s orchestra into one of the finest in the world …” No, the players in the Met’s orchestra did that. We need to stop putting individuals like Mr. Levine on pedestals and get over the tendency to make and worship superstars, to the point where horrible acts by such individuals get ignored. Mr. Levine was never indispensable. CME, SEATTLE
Some readers wondered if professional success and allegations of personal misconduct could be separated. 
Horrible. Just horrible. But it doesn’t detract from the beautiful music he and the Met created onstage. LOGAN ANDERSON, VIA FACEBOOK
The Met, may I remind everyone, is not a church, although it may be experienced by some, myself included, as a “religion.” We go there to hear music. And I for one will not buy into the idea the terrible and strange stuff that went on cancels all that out. Even if someone did terrible things, should we then ignore, condemn or eradicate the good things that same person did or created? Let’s put our daggers away, O.K., people? They don’t look good on us. ROGER, SAN FRANCISCO
The man is probably the greatest opera conductor/interpreter of all time. Although I cannot condone the behavior, he has not fallen from my grace. RICHARD FRAUENGLASS, HUNTINGTON, N.Y.
Readers said that their reactions to the news were affected by what the Met knew and for how long about Mr. Levine’s alleged behavior. They asked if the Met’s reputation should suffer accordingly. 
To be willfully blind is the same as being complicit. As long as the orchestra’s reputation remained stellar, it was anything goes for Maestro Levine. What price success, Mr. Gelb? TOM Q., SOUTHWICK, MASS.
How convenient for the Met to let Mr. Levine go now that he is 74 and in poor health. Why did they not have the courage to do something earlier? Before the #MeToo movement? When it was inconvenient? MOCKINGJAY, CALIFORNIA
