Review: An American in London (Bernstein, That Is)
LONDON — The last time Wayne McGregor and Christopher Wheeldon had premieres on the same program was in 2006, at the Royal Ballet. The minimalist, sculptural “Chroma,” by Mr. McGregor, was a smash hit, and led to his appointment as the Royal’s resident choreographer, a title he still holds. “DGV,” an exhilarating ensemble work by Mr. Wheeldon, was perhaps less surprising in its impact, but also a resounding success.
A two-out-of-two success rate is unusual in ballet, in which a string of forgettable commissions is usually the price to pay for the very occasional exceptional work. So hurrah for Mr. McGregor and Mr. Wheeldon, who have repeated their 2006 feat with a pair of terrific new pieces for the Royal Ballet, this time created for a Leonard Bernstein centenary program that also included Liam Scarlett’s 2014 “The Age of Anxiety.”
The program, part of the global “Leonard Bernstein at 100” celebrations honoring the American composer, opened on Thursday night at the Royal Opera House here.
Mr. McGregor’s “Yugen,” set to Bernstein’s “Chichester Psalms,” and with sets by the artist and writer Edmund de Waal, is his first work for the company since “Multiverse” in 2016. The title is a Japanese word, meaning beauty evoked with an economy of means, and the work mostly lives up to that premise. “Yugen” is far more conventionally balletic than Mr. McGregor’s usual style, which offers fractured angles; extreme, almost scary extensions of the legs; and swerving, curving torsos that often seem to propel the rest of the body into motion.
“Yugen” opens on a spare stage, dotted with four tall light-box towers in which dancers stand, silhouetted against a white glow. Federico Bonelli and Sarah Lamb are at the front of the stage. As the first rousing strains of Bernstein’s 1965 choral score sound (“Awake, psaltery and harp! I will rouse the dawn!”), they begin to dance with smooth lyricism, soon joined by nine dancers, whom Mr. McGregor deftly fragments into continually evolving groupings as the psalm continues its exultant path.
As the voice of a young boy sings a treble solo, Calvin Richardson begins a slow, swirling solo, often dropping to the floor, then propelling himself back up with curving, undulating momentum. He remains central throughout the piece, later coming between Ms. Lamb and Mr. Bonelli as they perform a floating, ethereal pas de deux. At another moment, he is lifted and carried by five men as the chorus sings in Hebrew, “Lord, Lord, My heart is not haughty.”
Is he a Christ figure, a seeker, in need of comfort or a giver of comfort? Ms. Lamb too seems to incarnate or represent something, as her body is arched and curved between Mr. Bonelli and Mr. Richardson, who lift and carry her in a particularly lovely passage close to the end. Is she beauty? Love? The unattainable? Mr. McGregor plays with these ideas, as his title suggests. Perhaps they remain too elusive, as do Mr. de Waal’s sets, which initially suggest portals or gateways, but acquire little resonance through use or the otherwise skillful lighting by Lucy Carter.
Mr. McGregor remains intensely responsive to the slightly strange fusion of sacred text and tone, with jazzy undercurrents in “Chichester Psalms.” And Mr. Wheeldon is similarly resourceful in his responses to Bernstein’s “Serenade after Plato: Symposium,” a violin concerto in five movements that slips between poetic lyricism and driving dynamic rhythm. (Mr. Wheeldon first choreographed to this score in 1999; Alexei Ratmansky also used it in 2016.)
With Greek-inspired costumes by the fashion designer Erdem Moralioglu, “Corybantic Games” (the title is a reference to the wild dances of the priests of Cybele, the goddess of nature) is a large-scale work that shows Mr. Wheeldon’s dazzling range of movement invention.
The ballet begins with surging ensemble dances for men (first movement) and women (second movement), and is full of erupting jumps, high circling turns and magically dissolving and reforming circles. Greek dance linkages are a constant theme; men and women touch, turn around one other, form interwoven groups (echoes of Balanchine’s “Serenade” and “Apollo”) and lines.
In the lightning-fast third movement, Mayara Magri and Marcelino Sambé offer a brilliant, flashing-past-the-eyes duo; in the fourth movement, three pairs (one female, one male, one mixed) dance with tender lyricism. This is perhaps the most interesting section of the work, in which Mr. Wheeldon explores the varying partnering possibilities between the same sex and opposite sex duos while creating a painterly picture, beautifully lighted by Peter Mumford.
Mr. Wheeldon incorporates into the mix stylized Egyptian profile gestures, flexed feet at odd moments, shoulder stands and sinuously undulating upper bodies. It’s sometimes as odd, life-filled and surprising as Bernstein’s score, in which different musical styles often feel like they are crashing together. It’s not perfect (the fifth movement, a grand finale, feels rather bewilderingly busy), but it’s exhilaratingly full of creative force.
A version of this review appears in print on March 17, 2018, on Page C6 of the New York edition with the headline: New Pieces Duplicate A Success From 2006.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe


