7 Things to Do With Your Kids in NYC This Weekend
Our guide to cultural events in New York City for children and teenagers happening this weekend and in the week ahead.
BALLET WORKSHOP AND STORYTIME: CELEBRATING JEROME ROBBINS at the Children’s Center at 42nd Street, New York Public Library (April 6, 3 p.m.). Imagine getting professional instruction in dancing the first movement of a Jerome Robbins ballet — no tuition, audition or previous experience required. That’s the opportunity the library will present to children on Friday as part of a yearlong series of events commemorating Robbins’s 100th birthday. Recommended for dance fans 5 and older, the program will center on “Glass Pieces,” a ballet that was choreographed to music by Philip Glass and captures the breakneck pace and fierce purpose of pedestrians on New York streets. (Robbins was a city native.) An evocative picture book — Salvatore Rubbino’s “A Walk in New York” — will be read to the young participants, who will then learn the dance from Deborah Lohse, a choreographer and performance artist. Each child will leave with not only the memory of the steps, but also a free copy of the book. (Space is limited, and registration is required.)212-621-0208, nypl.org/events
CATSBURY PARK CAT CONVENTION at Convention Hall and the Paramount Theater, Asbury Park, N.J. (April 7-8, 11 a.m.-7 p.m.). This isn’t the Asbury Park that Bruce Springsteen immortalized — he didn’t add meows to any of his tracks — but this temporary addition to the boardwalk still promises to be worth a road trip. With proceeds benefiting Catsbury Park, a local cat cafe and rescue organization, this festival will host appearances by celebrity animals like Lil Bub and Nala, as well as seminars on cat care and a D.J. providing feline-themed tunes. Children may especially enjoy attractions like cat trivia, cat bingo, a cat costume competition and a yoga session with cats.catsburyconvention.com
DISCOVER OPERA! ‘OPERAPUNZEL’ AND ‘THE MAGIC FLUTE’ at the Manhattan School of Music (April 8, 2:30 p.m.; April 9, 6:30 p.m.). Rapunzel won’t be alone in letting down her hair: Nothing is staid or formulaic during these free concert performances from the Manhattan School of Music’s outreach program. Intended to introduce children to opera, the double bill leads off with “Operapunzel.” The hourlong work by Mark Janas (and the cast) sets “Rapunzel” in a 1960s hair salon and explains the art form’s terms and elements. It will be followed by a 45-minute adaptation of Mozart’s fanciful “The Magic Flute.” (If your family isn’t ready for an opera doubleheader, the school will also offer a relaxed, lower-volume “Operapunzel,” geared toward children on the autism spectrum or with special needs, on Sunday at 11:30 a.m.)917-493-4428, msmnyc.edu/performances
‘THE LITTLE BLACK FISH’ at Triskelion Arts (through April 8). This children’s tale from the 1960s by the Iranian writer Samad Behrangi doesn’t sound particularly subversive: Its title character longs to explore the world beyond his small pond and see what influence he can have on others. Nevertheless, the story’s nonconformist theme was strong enough to cause Iran’s prerevolutionary government to ban the work. But while Mr. Behrangi’s career was brief, his fiction has lived on, and now Maaa Theater Company has adapted “The Little Black Fish” for the stage. Combining music, narration, physical theater and video, this Brooklyn production illuminates an adventure in which a tiny hero has a huge impact. 571-212-7796, blackfish.bpt.me
LOVE DOUBLE DUTCH PARTY! at the Brooklyn Children’s Museum (April 7, noon-4 p.m.). To quote an old rock song, you might as well jump. And if you don’t know how, you can learn. That’s one of the benefits of this celebration, which honors both the game of double Dutch — in which one person or a team jumps over two ropes being twirled simultaneously in opposite directions — and the publication of the novel “Love Double Dutch!” At noon, the book’s author, Doreen Spicer-Dannelly, will read from her work, whose 13-year-old heroine, MaKayla, is trying to make it into a national tournament. More fun follows at 1 p.m. on the museum’s rooftop, with music, dancing, arts and crafts and workshops taught by two National Double Dutch League teams.718-735-4400, brooklynkids.org/double-dutch
OPENING WEEKEND IN PROSPECT PARK (April 7-8). Harbingers of warm, sunny days — baseballs, returning songbirds, carousel animals — will all fly at the park this weekend in a celebration of the start of spring. Whichever is your family’s favorite, these Brooklyn acres offer an associated activity. On Saturday, youth league ballplayers and marching bands parade at 10 a.m., followed by the throwing of the ceremonial first pitches. Next is old-fashioned fun — in every sense — with the Brooklyn Atlantics, historical re-enactors who will play a ballgame according to 1860s rules while wearing period-style gear. Other Saturday highlights include a fair with food and crafts and a noontime introduction to bird-watching. Sunday starts with an 8 a.m. bird walk and continues with a Prospect Park History Walking Tour (registration is required) at 10:30. On both days, children can enjoy a nature exploration with the Prospect Park Alliance, spring planting and colonial-era pastimes at the Lefferts Historic House, rides on the park’s 1912 carousel and free admission at its zoo. They can also say goodbye to winter with final spins around the ice-skating rink.718-965-8951, prospectpark.org/spring
SPRING FAMILY DAY: THE POWER OF MUSIC AND YOU at the Resnick Education Wing, Carnegie Hall (April 8, noon-4 p.m.). Music often carries a message. At this free event, which is first come first served, young people can discover the mission that’s behind many musical compositions: a call to action. Inspired by The ’60s: The Years That Changed America, a recent Carnegie Hall citywide festival, this open house will feature a community sing-in; a drum circle; a workshop on making tambourines and guitars for an interactive performance with Bash the Trash; a collaborative mural project; and digital listening stations, where children can remix and sample tracks, putting their own spin on ’60s freedom songs. And what’s a movement without movement? The activities will also include learning the era’s signature dances and trying them out to tunes played by Mwenso and the Shakes.212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org/events
A version of this article appears in print on April 6, 2018, on Page C27 of the New York edition with the headline: For Children.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe


