6 Comedy Shows to Catch in NYC This Weekend
Our guide to stand-up, improv and variety shows happening this weekend and in the week ahead.
‘BROWN PRIVILEGE COMEDY’ at Friends and Lovers Brooklyn (April 17, 8 p.m.). The stand-up comedian Saurin Choksi started this monthly event with his childhood friend, the musician Sareen Patel, who started performing under the name Brown Privilege back in 2014. Eventually, the two decided to collaborate on an event series that brought comedy and music together, and named it after Mr. Patel’s musical moniker. This month’s lineup includes Hannah Boone, Dulcé Sloan and Rob Haze.fnlbk.com
‘DARK SPOTS’ at Union Hall (April 14, 8 p.m.). Alison Zeidman, Shane Torres and Nate Fridson host this quarterly comedy showcase that features a diverse roster of performers who all manage to take the darker and sadder aspects of life and turn it into comedy. Roy Wood Jr., a regular correspondent on “The Daily Show With Trevor Noah,” is joined by the hilarious comedian Janelle James, the host of “Brown Privilege Comedy” (see above) Saurin Choksi and many others.718-638-4400, unionhallny.com
‘IN A WORLD: THE DATING SHOW’ at the Peoples Improv Theater Striker Stage (April 14, 8 p.m.). Since July 2017, the comedian Emma Vernon has hosted her brainchild of a show at the Peoples Improv Theater. In it, she lives out her dreams of being a matchmaker, à la Patti Stanger (and persistent, impatient moms everywhere), and sets up dates between people who fill out a Google form with details like what they’re looking for and descriptions of themselves. The potential couple meets onstage for the first time and picks a location out of a hat, after which improvisers jump in on the action and bring the scene to life. Ms. Vernon has yet to succeed in forging a lasting union, but perhaps her luck is about to change.212-563-7488, thepit-nyc.com/the-pit-striker
‘LATE NIGHT WHENEVER’ at the Jerome L. Greene Performance Space (April 17, 7:30 p.m.). For this new late-night-talk-show-style podcast, taped in front of a live audience and produced by WNYC, the comedian Michelle Buteau interviews celebrities and performs monologues centered on current events, while Rob Lewis provides music. This week, the guests will include Danielle Brooks, also known as Taystee on Netflix’s “Orange Is the New Black,” and Ben Sinclair, also known as the weed-slinging guy on HBO’s “High Maintenance.”646-829-4000, thegreenespace.org
‘REGULAR COMEDY’ at Murmrr Ballroom (April 19, 9 p.m.). The name of this comedy series may sound underwhelming, but the talent on the bill is usually anything but. This time, Yedoye Travis, Kate Willett and Shane Torres make an appearance, along with the “Broad City” queen Ilana Glazer and a couple of special surprise guests.murmrr.com
‘SISTERS OF COMEDY’ at Carolines on Broadway (April 18, 7:30 p.m.). The writer and activist Agunda Okeyo, who presents this regular series, is calling its latest installment “The Wakanda (BLK AF) Edition,” in celebration of the film “Black Panther.” The series highlights some of the best black performers around, and this lineup is no different. Dulcé Sloan, of “The Daily Show With Trevor Noah,” will be joined by Nore Davis, of “Inside Amy Schumer”; Sasheer Zamata, of “Saturday Night Live”; and Black Thought, of the hip-hop group the Roots.212-757-4100, carolines.com
A version of this article appears in print on April 13, 2018, on Page C21 of the New York edition with the headline: Comedy.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe


