This Week: a Devilish Matthew Broderick; and a Righteous Chiwetel Ejiofor
New TV shows, museum openings, film releases and concerts — it’s a lot to keep track of. Let us help you. For the week of April 15, seven events in New York and elsewhere not to be missed:
Through May 13; irishrep.org.
Sometimes St. Nick stops by on Christmas Eve, and sometimes the devil drops in. Bad luck for you if he’s in the mood to play a game of poker for your soul. He calls himself Mr. Lockhart, not Lucifer, in Conor McPherson’s “The Seafarer,” but that’s who it is all right, tagging along to the Harkin brothers’ seedy holiday do. That’s why this boozing, brawling comedy with its undertone of dread is one of the rare Christmas plays that may be more advisable at any other time of year.
Starring Matthew Broderick as Mr. Lockhart, Ciarán O’Reilly’s Irish Repertory Theater production is in previews for an opening on Wednesday, April 18. Mr. Broderick, a two-time Tony Award winner who gave a critically praised performance in Mr. McPherson’s “Shining City” at Irish Rep in 2016, is fun to watch when he brings an edge of menace, as he did in Wallace Shawn’s “Evening at the Talk House,” at the New Group last season.
In “The Seafarer,” though, the menace is somewhat pickled. “Well, to tell you the truth,” Mr. Lockhart says, growing woozy from poteen, “I never drink this much.”
“Yeah, well,” one of his hosts says, “welcome to our house.” LAURA COLLINS-HUGHES
In the 1990s, Bishop Carlton Pearson drew more than 5,000 worshipers to his Sunday services at Higher Dimensions Family, a Pentecostal church in Tulsa, Okla. Since casting out his first demon at the age of 16, he has advised former Presidents George W. Bush and Bill Clinton; Oral Roberts, the evangelist whose namesake university Mr. Pearson attended, called him a son.
Then, while watching a program about the Rwandan genocide, Mr. Pearson had a revelation that slammed hard up against his church’s doctrine, which maintained that non-Christians were destined for hell unless they professed their belief in Jesus. What if hell was a human construct and everyone was already the recipient of God’s mercy? Mr. Pearson confessed his change of heart in the pulpit and endured a fall from grace as meteoric as his rise, with even Mr. Roberts pleading with him to take back his heretical words.
In “Come Sunday,” now on Netflix, Chiwetel Ejiofor gives an electrifying performance as Mr. Pearson, mining his crisis of faith and advocating a “Gospel of Inclusion” — even if the sermonizing at the heart of Joshua Marston’s drama fails to raise the rafters with hallelujahs. KATHRYN SHATTUCK
April 19; lincolncenter.org. April 20; carnegiehall.org.
Two recitals in New York this week provide distinct but equally persuasive engagements with the world of song. As part of Lincoln Center’s Great Performers series, on Thursday, April 19, the tenor Mark Padmore and pianist Paul Lewis — a collaboration The Times once called a lieder “dream team” — tackle works by Brahms and Schumann, including the latter’s major cycles “Liederkreis” and “Dichterliebe.”
And at Weill Recital Hall the next evening, the rising young soprano Julia Bullock will be joined by pianist John Arida for a mixed program that includes canonic songs by Schubert and Barber, as well as a set of jazz and blues tunes made famous by African-American singers, including Nina Simone, Billie Holiday, among others. WILLIAM ROBIN
Through Sept. 3; momaps1.org.
The photographs in the Indian artist Gauri Gill’s “Acts of Appearance” series are halfway between ethnographic intervention and community art project. Asking members of a Maharashtra community known for its papier-mâché masks to depict everyday characters and animals instead of the usual lions, gods and heroes, Ms. Gill then photographed them, in the masks, in their own familiar surroundings.
A teacher in a blank-eyed mask in front of a classroom’s wall covered in signs and posters brings out the weirdly arbitrary way almost any cultural practice looks when seen from the outside. And a shopkeeper with the head of a cobra is a reminder that everyday life is the material from which gods and heroes evolve in the first place.
“Acts of Appearance” is Ms. Gill’s most recent series, but this exhibition will also include stark black-and-white shots documenting life in Rajasthan, as well as images of a defunct government initiative to encourage writing and drawing on schoolhouse walls. WILL HEINRICH
As Olivia Benson on “Law & Order: SVU,” Mariska Hargitay has become a potent symbol of justice for victims of sexual assault and domestic violence. In real life, she is no less a superhero, working through her Joyful Heart Foundation to end the staggering nationwide backlog of rape kits, whose DNA evidence remain untested because of a lack of money, staffing or even interest.
“I Am Evidence,” a documentary airing Monday, April 16, on HBO, of which Ms. Hargitay is a producer, follows powerful advocates committed to eliminating that backlog — people like Kym Worthy, a Michigan prosecutor, who in 2009 discovered some 11,000 untested kits in an abandoned Detroit warehouse. Their hope is to charge violent offenders who have long evaded the law.
“I am evidence, literally. My name is on a box on a shelf that’s never been tested,” says one woman, who was raped the night of her 21st birthday party and recalls how a police detective told her that her evidence would, in effect, go nowhere. And, as proof, he even offered to show her the mountain of kits waiting to be tested before hers. KATHRYN SHATTUCK
April 21-22; worldmusicinstitute.org.
For anyone curious about classical Indian dance, the annual Dancing the Gods festival warrants a visit. Presented by the World Music Institute at Symphony Space, the two-day (and too-short) event illuminates some of Indian dance’s many complex lineages. Lecture-demonstrations by Rajika Puri, the festival’s organizer, provide helpful context before each performance.
This year’s edition features dancers and musicians rarely seen in New York, beginning on Saturday, April 21, with the vibrant soloist Amrita Lahiri, who specializes in the South Indian form Kuchipudi. On Sunday, April 22, the focus shifts to Sattriya, a form originating in monasteries of the northeastern state of Assam. The Dancing Monks of Assam, in their United States debut, join forces with Sattriya Dance Company of Philadelphia for “Sattriya: An Odyssey of the Spirit,” a work by Bhabananda Barbuyan that calls on the performers’ skills as dancers, singers and percussionists. SIOBHAN BURKE
April 16-20; paradiseofbachelors.com/nap-eyes.
Mid-April is a quiet time for live music in the New York area. With many A-list acts on the opposite coast for Coachella (whose first session wraps up this Sunday, April 15, and whose second begins Friday, April 20), the biggest local venues can feel like ghost towns.
Few acts suit this sleepy mood better than Nap Eyes, whose music has a wonderfully somnambulant quality to match their name. “I’m Bad Now,” the Canadian folk-rock band’s third album, is an unhurried stroll through the mind of the singer and guitarist Nigel Chapman. It’s a low-key delight, with shades of Bob Dylan, Luna and the Velvet Underground at their most velvety.
Enjoy the band’s calm sounds and striking phrases when Nap Eyes conclude their latest U.S. tour this week with shows in Washington, D.C. (April 16), Philadelphia (April 17), Brooklyn (Elsewhere, April 19) and Allston, Mass. (April 20). SIMON VOZICK-LEVINSON
