What’s on TV Friday: ‘Bobby Kennedy for President’ and ‘Vice’
A new documentary explores the rise and fall of Robert F. Kennedy. And “Vice” examines efforts to arm teachers in classrooms.
BOBBY KENNEDY FOR PRESIDENT on Netflix. While “Chappaquiddick,” in theaters now, tells the morbid story of Ted Kennedy and Mary Jo Kopechne, this new documentary series focuses on his older brother. Directed by Dawn Porter, the series explores Robert Kennedy’s beginnings as a young attorney and his rise out of J.F.K.’s shadow; his fresh-faced 1964 campaign for the Senate; and then his 83-day run for the presidency, which ended with his assassination in 1968. Historical footage is revisited, and prominent figures from the era, like Representative John Lewis and Harry Belafonte, are interviewed.
THE WEEK OF on Netflix. Twenty years ago Adam Sandler was a wedding singer. Now he’s the father of the bride (and Chris Rock is the father of the groom) in this new film about a disastrous wedding week full of unhinged relatives and asbestos. The cast also includes Rachel Dratch and Steve Buscemi. This is the last submission in a four-film deal Mr. Sandler made with Netflix in 2014; the first three, for what it’s worth, have received terrible reviews.
VICE 7:30 p.m. on HBO. After the Parkland, Fla., shootings, the N.R.A. and President Trump suggested that the solution to school shootings would be to arm teachers. But how would that work, exactly? This “Vice” episode, “The Parkland Effect,” examines a Florida program that trains teachers to use firearms in the classroom. The correspondent Gianna Toboni hears arguments from both sides of the debate, including from the NRATV host Grant Stinchfield.
LIVE FROM LINCOLN CENTER 9 p.m. on PBS (check local listings). Leslie Odom Jr. won a Tony for portraying Aaron Burr in “Hamilton,” where he flaunted a creamy falsetto, a jagged howl and a pristine rap flow. Since then he’s been far less of an M.C. than a crooner, focusing on elegant interpretations of the American songbook. (“He has a sterling voice, and in his music he is much more comfortable with his upper register than in ‘Hamilton,’” Jon Caramanica wrote in The New York Times.) There’s hardly a better setting for his lush arrangements of standards than Lincoln Center’s Appel Room, where this concert was filmed. You might not even mind not being in the room where it happened.
DAVID BOWIE: FIVE YEARS (2013) 10 p.m. on BBC America. The title of this documentary refers not to the apocalyptic scenario of the David Bowie song but rather five crucial years across his career. Footage starts with 1971 — when he released that song and unleashed his Ziggy Stardust persona — and also examines 1975, with the emergence of the Thin White Duke, and 1983, when “Let’s Dance” hit the top of the charts in both America and Britain. Like the current exhibit at the Brooklyn Museum, this documentary dips into Bowie’s personal archive of costumes, set designs, lyrics and memorabilia to illuminate his life.
A version of this schedule appears in print on April 27, 2018, on Page C12 of the New York edition with the headline: What’s On Friday.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe


