Teaching Activities for: ‘Live Nation Rules Music Ticketing, Some Say With Threats’
Before reading the article:
Do you attend music concerts?
If so, where do you buy tickets, and what kinds of fees are placed on the purchase?
Do you think tickets are overpriced? Why or why not?
What do you know about the booking of music talent, the selection of venues and the selling of tickets for concerts?
Now, read the article, “Live Nation Rules Music Ticketing, Some Say With Threats,” and answer the following questions: 
1. What concerned the critics of the merger of Ticketmaster and Live Nation in 2010, and why?
2. What was the consent decree negotiated as part of the merger approval designed to do, according to the article, and has it achieved its aim?
3. What are the details the article gives about the Department of Justice’s inquiries into possible antitrust violations and Live Nation’s behavior in the marketplace?
4. Under the subheading “Multiple Incomes,” what is the problem with the possibility Live Nation has become too big and too empowered by the merger, and why?
5. Under the subheading “Talent Needs,” what happened to AEG officials when they considered replacing Ticketmaster with their own ticketing service, and why did AEG complain about the incident to the Justice Department?
6. Under the subheading “A Regulator’s Quandary,” what was Live Nation’s response to the Los Angeles Football Club’s complaint to Major League Soccer that Live Nation had threatened to withhold talent?
7. Under the subheading “A Regulator’s Quandary,” do you think the case demonstrates bullying on the part of Live Nation, or just a business decision? Why?
Finally, tell us more about what you think: 
Do you think Live Nation has gotten too big and too powerful? Why or why not?
The Times’s David Leonhardt wrote an Opinion essay, “Big Business Is Too Big,” that begins:
Do you think, as Mr. Leonhardt does, that the United States has an oligopoly problem — a concentration of corporate power that has been building for years and that aggravates inequality?
Why or why not, and if so, what should be done about it
