Much-Anticipated Sporting Events
TUESDAY PUZZLE — Happy spring, everyone. Today’s column is brought to you by the makers of Claritin, and all the other things I use to keep my seasonal allergies at bay. That change of seasons will really do a number on a person, and Andrew Zhou is here to remind us of that.
Our reminder lies in the almost homophones that open the theme entries. I say almost because not everyone pronounces the openings the same way you would the names of the seasons. They’re pretty close, though, and I liked the revealer at 53A (SEASON OPENERS), which helps those almost homophones emerge.
For example, at 20A, the entry is SPRINKLER HEAD. If we just look at the opening of the theme entry, we have SPRINK, which is the way my Eastern European grandmother used to pronounce “spring.” And they just get wackier from there, as Mr. Zhou says in his notes below. If you’d like to see all four of the theme entries and their SEASON OPENERS, click here.
60A: Sometimes “Pitch-perfect?” has to do with music, but today we’re talking about baseball pitches. If you have a “Pitch-perfect?” game, it’s a NO-HITter.
64A: I wanted “Good GOD Almighty!” I saw it was four letters, put in LORD, that was wrong, and I subsequently found out the entry was GAWD. Such is life.
1D: I had SLICE for “Leftover pizza part,” saw it was wrong, realized that I really wanted pizza, and subsequently filled in CRUST, although I know a lot of pizza crust lovers. The Extremely Spunky Border terrier is one, and she gets all my crusts, without cheese or sauce.
5D: I had EDINB___, filled in EDINBERG, saw it was wrong, tried EDINBURG, saw that was wrong, and finally got EDINBORO from the crossings.
12D: I loved the not-so-obvious misdirection here: “Reed” made me think of a reed instrument, and “guitar” kept my brain thinking about music. Today, however, we’re thinking about a person named “Reed with a guitar,” and that would be LOU Reed.
Almost finished solving but just need a bit more help? We’ve got you covered.
Warning: There be spoilers ahead, but now you can take a peek at the answer key. While the answers are free to everyone, the Crossword puzzles require a subscription.
Your thoughts?
