A Childhood Eden Seared by Violence. Set to Music?
There’s a line near the start of the new musical “The Lucky Ones” that’s a deliberate hedge — an explanation of the rules of the show that also leaves those rules a little murky.
“This is a true story,” Shaun Bengson tells the audience from the stage of the Connelly Theater in the East Village. “Even the parts that never happened.”
And with those words, Mr. Bengson and his wife, Abigail — the other half of the folk-rock duo the Bengsons, the indie-theater darlings who created the show for Ars Nova — attempt to draw a cloak of privacy around themselves and the people they love.
Ms. Bengson, 35, has a tale to tell about the autumn she was 15, when her family shattered and the seemingly safe Eden she grew up in was lost forever. Yet she is terrified of compounding anyone’s anguish.
So “The Lucky Ones” is wounded autobiography veiled in fiction. Set in crunchy small-town New England (“a part of Vermont that happens to be in Maine”), it’s a follow-up to “Hundred Days,” a musical memoir of the Bengsons’ beginnings as a couple that was a hit last fall at New York Theater Workshop. Like “Hundred Days,” “The Lucky Ones” is directed by Anne Kauffman and has a book co-written by the playwright Sarah Gancher, who is the Bengsons’ neighbor across the hall in Ridgewood, Queens.
In the new show, an extended family runs a school together, raising their children — Abigail, her sisters and their cousins — in a kind of hippie idyll. Then, in one cataclysmic season, it all falls apart, beginning with a killing that might have been prevented if only the parents hadn’t been so committed to a you-choose-your-feelings worldview that they dismissed the signs of mental illness in one of the kids.
“It’s possible that we have all been raised in a way that hurt us,” Abigail says in the show. “And maybe hurt us so badly that we will hurt other people.”
Like Abigail, the character she plays in “The Lucky Ones,” Ms. Bengson grew up in an extended hippie family that revolved around a school. In reality, though, the person in her clan who killed someone was not a blood relative but rather a person she had been raised to consider an older sibling — someone she loved and admired, who “wrote strange and beautiful music,” who claimed to hear voices and did as they instructed.
This is the person, no longer institutionalized, whose life Ms. Bengson is most fearful of harming with “The Lucky Ones,” an ensemble piece in which a cascade of events results in the dissolution of her family, including her parents’ marriage.
A large-scale show with a chorus, it’s intended as the second part of a trilogy that will continue with a musical about Mr. Bengson’s early life. Critical reception of “The Lucky Ones” has been mixed, with Jesse Green of The New York Times calling it “a gawky, powerful work in progress,” while Sandy MacDonald, in Time Out New York, found it “harrowing.”
Ms. Bengson is sure of her right to tell such a story onstage because it is a fundamental trauma of her past, overlapping though it does with other people’s pain and struggles. Yet the acceptability of drawing bystanders into one’s own art is one of the great ethical debates in any kind of autobiography. That’s true even when you change names and details, and create what Mr. Bengson called “the novel-myth version” of the story.
“Is it possible to tell the truth kindly?” Ms. Bengson said. “I don’t know. But it’s what I’m trying to do.”
“One of my sisters, she said, ‘Don’t let your fear get in the way of the truth of this,’” Ms. Bengson added. “I know that in taking this on, I can’t be meek, I can’t glaze over, I can’t allow fear or denial to be the story of our family, because that was toxic, too.”
Ars Nova, which also co-produced “Sundown, Yellow Moon,” a Rachel Bonds play with music by the Bengsons, has an estimable record with nontraditional musicals that includes birthing “Natasha, Pierre & the Great Comet of 1812.” It was the company that matched Ms. Gancher with the Bengsons several years ago.
To whatever degree “The Lucky Ones” is fictionalized, she finds it “really lovely to be working on a true story.”
“I spend so much of my life making up characters or brainstorming situations or coming up with scenarios,” Ms. Gancher said. “The beauty part of this is that any question that I can think of to ask, there’s an answer to, and the answer is always weirder and more interesting and more surprising and sort of brighter than anything that I could make up.”
And she has a deep affection for the Bengsons.
“They’re people with a lot of pain and a lot of damage,” she said, “but also a lot of strength and a lot of magic.”
They are also so intertwined, personally and professionally, that they share a bio in the program for “The Lucky Ones.”
“Is that gross?” Ms. Bengson asked recently, in the tone of someone checking to make sure she doesn’t have lipstick on her teeth. “I recognize it’s a little codependent.”
Mr. Bengson, 34, cracked up at this, seated beside her in the apartment in Alphabet City where they stayed through early previews, to be close to the theater.
Ms. Bengson says that she and her husband are both “profoundly introverted,” but you wouldn’t know it from talking with them. He seems gentle, diffident but steely underneath, while there’s a sparkle to her, and a healthy dash of punk spicing her earth-mother serenity. Louie, their blond-ringleted toddler, is a year and a half old, and Ms. Bengson throws up her hands at the challenge of not swearing in front of him.
“He’s going to be a pirate by 5,” she said, and her husband laughed again. “But I can’t stop. So, you’re welcome, Louie.”
The Bengsons married 10 years ago, three weeks after their first date. Four years ago, shortly after they got the commission from Ars Nova that would result in “The Lucky Ones,” Ms. Bengson had a miscarriage — an event that “rocked us very deeply,” she said, and “set us on this path of wanting to write about family and trauma.”
Part of that was an awareness, new to Mr. Bengson, of what a fragile thing a family can be. Part of it was a wish to examine how to go about making a family — thoughtfully, unconventionally, as their own parents did — even while aware of the unintended harm that parents can cause children in the process.
At least at the start, they also nursed the naïve wish to repair what had been broken in Ms. Bengson’s adolescence — “to Parent Trap the family,” as Mr. Bengson put it.
“Sometimes there are wounds so deep that they never all the way heal,” he said. “And I really hoped that wasn’t so.”
Some people in the family Ms. Bengson grew up in don’t talk to one another anymore, but for the musical the Bengsons interviewed all of them — including the older sibling, so-called, who committed the crime. Those interviews became part of the piece. Primarily for ethical reasons, Ms. Bengson said, they did not contact relatives of the person who was killed.
In her own family, opinion about the existence of the show is divided — some of those depicted vehemently in favor, some opposed. Some have come to see it. The Bengsons’ nightmare scenario is to have family drama break out in the audience, where they would have to witness it from the stage.
A few performances deeper into previews, after they had moved back home to Queens, Ms. Bengson sat at their blond-wood kitchen table, a plastic bag of old cassette tapes in front of her.
Some of those tapes, she said, have been to prison and back — cassettes on which her budding-songwriter self set down in music the fraught emotions she couldn’t speak. Her older sibling, so-called, would respond with feedback on her craftsmanship that helped to shape her as an artist.
“I’d be like, ‘Hey, it’s Friday,’ talking about nothing, and then I’d sing this heavy piece of music, talking about everything,” she said, and she realized that’s not so different from what she’s doing with the show itself. “I’m like, here I am, sending tapes to them, 20 years later.”
By “them,” she means her family.
A half-hour into an emotionally delicate interview, there was a soft knock on the front door: Ms. Gancher, bringing over some eggs in the shell.
“Thank you,” Ms. Bengson said from the kitchen. “I’ll eat those eggs. I love you so much!”
“I love you, too,” Ms. Gancher said, and exited.
A while later, this cameo struck Ms. Bengson as curious. “I wonder if she really wanted to give me eggs, or if she just wanted to make sure I was O.K.”
Either way, the closest Ms. Bengson has felt to how she did before her family cracked apart is with the artistic family behind “The Lucky Ones,” a show that allows her to spend time again in her childhood Eden, if only in her imagination.
But she thinks of Eden now as a place you have to outgrow, accepting the complexity of life and the presence of darkness — without fixating on the darkness.
“The task, I think, of storytelling,” she said, “is the reintegration of the dark and the light — going back and saying, ‘Yes, this darkness is here and it’s true.’ And, ‘There was light on us once, and there will be again.’”
