Corrections: February 27, 2018
FRONT PAGE
An article on Saturday about Rick Gates, a former top adviser to Donald J. Trump who pleaded to charges brought by Robert S. Mueller III, incorrectly described Mr. Gates’s employment after the election. He worked for the presidential inaugural committee, not the transition team. The article also misstated how long Mr. Gates traveled on the Trump campaign plane. He traveled with the candidate through the end of August, not Election Day.
•
NATIONAL
An article on Sunday about Warren Buffett’s annual letter to Berkshire Hathaway’s shareholders misstated the book value for Berkshire Hathaway in 2017. The value rose to $348 billion, not $358 billion.
•
NEW YORK
An article on Saturday about the corruption trial of Joseph Percoco misidentified the lawyer for Joseph Gerardi. He is Milton L. Williams Jr., not Milton J. Williams.
An article on Sunday about campaign contributions from state appointees to Gov. Andrew Cuomo misstated the circumstances of Kenneth A. Manning’s appointment to a state position by Mr. Cuomo. The governor appointed Mr. Manning to a state judicial screening committee, not the Roswell Park Cancer Institute. Mr. Manning was appointed to the cancer institute by the State Assembly leader. The article also misstated the timing of Howard Zemsky’s donations and appointments. Mr. Zemsky was appointed chairman of the Niagara Frontier Transportation Authority in 2012; all of his donations came before then, not before 2015, and all of his wife’s donations came after 2012, not 2015.
•
SPORTS
An article on Saturday about an Instagram post by Jonathan Martin, a former N.F.L. offensive lineman, misidentified the type of weapon pictured in his post. It was a shotgun and shells, not a rifle and bullets.
•
THE ARTS
A report in “Arts, Briefly” on Wednesday included an erroneous credit for Rammellzee. He did not have a cameo in the music video for Blondie’s “Rapture.”
A classical music entry in the Listings pages on Friday about the Danish String Quartet stated incorrectly that Simon Keenlyside would perform at Alice Tully Hall on Thursday at 7:30 p.m. Because of illness, Mr. Keenlyside had to cancel the event.
Errors are corrected during the press run whenever possible, so some errors noted here may not have appeared in all editions.
To contact the newsroom regarding correction requests, complaints or other comments about our coverage, please email nytnews@nytimes.com or call 1-844-NYT-NEWS (1-844-698-6397).
Comments on editorials may be emailed to letters@nytimes.com or faxed to (212) 556-3622.
For newspaper delivery questions: 1-800-NYTIMES (1-800-698-4637) or email customercare@nytimes.com.
A version of this correction appears in print on February 27, 2018, on Page A16 of the New York edition with the headline: Corrections.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe


