How I Uncovered Volkswagen’s Rigged Monkey Experiments
I’ve been covering the Volkswagen emissions scandal for more than two and a half years, writing dozens of articles as well as a book. But the Volkswagen article that generated by far the most outrage was about what the company did to a handful of monkeys.
It started with an anonymous informer who gave me hundreds of pages of documents from a lawsuit filed against Volkswagen in the United States. Among them was a deposition by Jake McDonald, a scientist at the Lovelace Respiratory Research Institute in Albuquerque.
That was weird. What did an Albuquerque lab have to do with Volkswagen?
It turned out that a research organization overseen and wholly financed by Volkswagen and other German carmakers had hired Lovelace to test the effects of diesel exhaust on monkeys. By locking 10 monkeys in glass chambers, and exposing them for four hours to diluted exhaust from a Volkswagen Beetle, according to court documents, the carmakers hoped to prove that modern technology had neutralized the toxic effects of diesel fumes, which are blamed for hundreds of thousands of premature deaths.
But the experiments were fundamentally flawed. The diesel Volkswagen Beetle used in the experiments was fitted with illegal software that reduced emissions substantially in lab conditions like those in Albuquerque, while allowing profuse amounts of pollution at other times. In other words, the emissions produced by the Beetle in the lab bore little relation to those produced in the real world.
In addition, the experiments were plagued with procedural errors, and did not even clearly show that a rigged Volkswagen was less harmful to the monkeys. All the monkeys — even those in the control group that didn’t breathe any exhaust — showed signs of inflammation in their lungs. But it wasn’t clear if the inflammation came from the exhaust or from the medical exams conducted before the experiments, which according to court records were not done properly. The experiments produced no useful scientific knowledge.
It would have been possible to just write a story about this clumsy attempt to salvage diesel’s declining reputation. But Jim Yardley, the editor on the story, pushed me to broaden the scope and use the monkey experiments as a window into the ways in which automakers have tried to influence the scientific debate about diesel, as well as the methods they use to exert political influence in Berlin and Brussels.
That broader story took a lot more reporting. Pinning down how the automakers used the studies to influence public policy was difficult. Environmental groups and lobbyist watchdog organizations told me that when corporations sponsor research, they rarely wave the studies around publicly. Rather, their front organizations manage to get the studies published in scientific journals, obscuring who paid for the research. The findings enter the bloodstream of the body politic, subtly influencing the debate.
The front organization that commissioned the monkey experiments and others related to diesel is the European Research Group on Environment and Health in the Transport Sector, known by its German initials E.U.G.T. To assess the group’s impact on the debate, I obtained a list of its other studies.
I discovered that some of the research had been cited by reputable organizations, including an arm of the British government. One study commissioned by the E.U.G.T., which cast doubt on whether traffic restrictions in cities led to cleaner air, influenced the judges in a court case in Austria to reject a suit by citizens of Graz who were pushing for the creation of a low-emissions zone in the city.
I’ve certainly had some tense conversations with auto companies and their representatives during the last couple of years. But they reacted fairly calmly when I asked them about the monkey research. Volkswagen, Daimler and BMW all distanced themselves from the experiments. After the article was published, all three companies took action against midlevel employees who had been responsible for overseeing the work of the front organization, relieving them of their duties pending internal investigations.
The carmakers’ low-key response to my questions about the monkeys indicates that they may have underestimated what the article’s repercussions would be. I know I did. I thought the story would make a splash, but I didn’t expect it to become the top story in German media for several days; for German Chancellor Angela Merkel to weigh in with an expression of condemnation; and for the German Parliament to hold a debate on the issue.
Why the outrage over the fate of 10 macaque monkeys when Volkswagen had already pleaded guilty to conspiracy to violate the United States Clean Air Act and other charges? After all, we already knew that diesel exhaust has caused hundreds of thousands of people to die prematurely, and that Volkswagen and other European carmakers took advantage of weak enforcement to mislead the public about how much pollution their vehicles produced.
I think the explanation is this: Until the 10 monkeys became part of the story, Volkswagen’s fraud had no identifiable victims. When people die from lung cancer or heart attacks after breathing air polluted by diesel cars, it’s impossible to point the finger at any one carmaker. The ill effects are cumulative and may take years to manifest themselves.
The 10 unfortunate monkeys, forced to breathe exhaust so that Volkswagen and the others could sell more cars, provided the scandal with its first specific casualties. They crystallized public frustration with the auto companies’ behavior.
As the magazine Der Spiegel wrote in an editorial, “The faces of our animal relatives opened our eyes to the unscrupulousness of this industry.”
In Germany, the monkey experiments may prompt action that watchdog groups have been seeking for years. Political leaders, fearful that their longtime acquiescence to the auto industry has become a liability, are talking about forcing all lobbyists to register and disclose their contributions to politicians, as they must already do in the United States. There are increasing calls for car companies to retrofit old diesels with better emissions equipment. And during the debate in Parliament, several representatives spoke of a need for “culture change” in the industry, a hint that they may push automakers to change their management.
In the days following the publication of my article, the No. 1 question readers asked was what happened to the monkeys — the answer to which I can now at least partly provide.
According to the Albuquerque lab, the 2014 experiments did not kill them, and they were returned to the general population of primates kept by the lab. Their fate since then is unclear — a spokeswoman for the lab said it shares information about the medical conditions of its animals only with government regulators. But it is safe to say they are among the most influential nonhuman primates in German history.
